---
title: Political virii in China
created_at: Thu, 13 Oct 2004 11:03:00 +0000
kind: article
tags:
  - asia
  - politics
  - tech
---

![](http://www.utsc.utoronto.ca/~04haklev/cover-nongmin-thumb.jpg)[A
Survey of Chinese
Peasants](http://www.lettre-ulysses-award.org/authors04/chen_wu.html) is
a book that was released while I was in China, and created a huge stir.
Originally it was meant to be banned, but somehow the book, which is
hugely critical of the communist party - but mostly the power-abusive
local cadres in rural villages - made it out in the book stands.
Probably it was local maneuvring by progressive factions of the
communist party which managed to get it published, and thereby secure
some leverage (the
[CCP](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_Communist_Party) is highly
factionalized and interesting things can come out of this fact).
However, as [Peking Duck](http://pekingduck.org/) and [the
Age](http://www.theage.com.au/articles/2004/03/03/1078295446788.html?oneclick=true)
points out, it was later [banned
again](http://pekingduck.org/archives/001076.php), before the [Party
Congress](http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/in_depth/asia_pacific/2002/china_party_congress/default.stm).

I actually did a paper on this book, which was my final project for
Chinese at [Lund University](http://www.lu.se), where I discussed
whether the book was an attack on the communist party in itself, or just
“rotten” corrupt parts of it (and came to the conclusion that it was
mostly the latter). Anyhow, the book has become quite well known in
China, the full text is available in China from a number of bulletin
boards (like [here](http://www.tylf.net/sannong/nongmin.html)). Finally
- [East South West North](http://www.zonaeuropa.com/weblog.htm)is
reporting that there is a [computer virus
circulating](http://www.zonaeuropa.com/02011.htm) that spreads the web
address of the book, with messages such as:

“We’re meeting tonight at a newly opened pub. There is a review at
http://www.xx78p.com. Don’t forget to call me.”

“The list of the ten countries that are most threatening to China as
listed at http://www.xx78p.com.”

Interesting way of spreading political propaganda!

Stian
