---
title: A career at the UN?
created_at: Wed, 19 Oct 2004 11:05:00 +0000
kind: article
tags: development
---

![](http://as.wn.com/i/3a/1d3cc0f399e76e.jpg)In my endless search for
internships, I spent a while last night looking at different UN
sub-organizations, and read up a bit on the topic of how to get a job
there. I thought others might be interested, so here are the major
pathways into the UN system, as far as I can ascertain (this information
is provided “as is”).

**Internships:** Most of the UN organizations provide internships,
although most of them are available to MA students only. Usually they
are not remunerated, and you will have to find your own funding. Some
organizations search for specific interns, whereas at others, you must
fill out an online form for a database, from which interns matching
certain criteria will be selected.

**[JPO programme](http://www.jposc.org/html/ie.html)**: The Junior
Professional Officer programme is aimed at graduates with a bachelor or
master degree. It does not require extensive work experience, and is
designed to familiarize the applicant with the UN system. Application is
through the home government of a participating nation, and the programme
is financed by the home country. The applicant is either placed in a
field-mission, or less often at the central office, for a duration of
two to three years. Depending on outcome, a second placement of two to
three years is possible. At the end, only very exceptional participants
gain final employment with the UN - the programme is also designed to
train people to cooperate with the UN in international NGOs or home
governments.

**[Competitive
exams:](http://www.un.org/Depts/OHRM/examin/welcome.htm)** UN personell
at levels [P-2](http://www.un.org/Depts/OHRM/examin/p2.htm) and P-3 are
mainly recruited through competitive exams, which are held once a year
in selected countries (depending on which nationalities are currently
needed to achieve a balance in the system). Examinees must have a
relevant bachelor or masters degree (students with a degree in
International Development Studies are eligible to take the exam for
[Social Affairs](http://www.un.org/Depts/OHRM/examin/p2socjd.htm). See a
[sample exam](http://www.un.org/Depts/OHRM/examin/p2socsam.htm).).
Select candidates are then invited for an interview. *(Interestingly,
this system reminds me quite a lot of the [imperial exam
system](http://www.csupomona.edu/~plin/ls201/confucian3.html) in
[dynastic China](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_China).)*

**[Direct entry:](https://jobs.un.org/release1/vacancy/vacancy.asp)**
Some positions at the P-3 level, and all at levels above, are filled
either by external search, or internal promotion. Anyone can apply for
these positions, but usually a relevant university degree plus at least
six years of working experience is required.

Good luck! :\~)

Stian
