---
title: "Mexico City, UNAM, Hunger, Butterflies"
created_at: Thu, 26 May 2005 05:59:00 +0000
kind: article
tags:
- books
- personal
---

***Some tidbits:***

Just saw the movie **[The Butterfly
Effect](http://imdb.com/title/tt0289879/)**, and I quite liked it. I’ve
seen a few other movies where they use “innovative” (maybe it once was)
techniques of jumping to and from in times (**Memento** comes to mind as
a very good example), others were characters struggle with loss of
memory, alternate dimensions, thinking they are going crazy - and the
viewer doesn’t know which version is “real” (**A Beautiful Mind** is a
good example). Oh, let’s not forget the seminal **Sliding Doors**, which
illustrated nicely “what might have happened”. It was a nice movie
though, and raised some philosophical questions. Fate and all that.
(What might have happened if I had missed that train going to Oslo for
my interview for my [United World College](http://www.uwcad.it), back in
1998? Would I be in Mexico right now?) Simple conclusion: Tiny events
can have huge repercussions (The Butterfly Effect, if I remember
correctly, posits that a butterfly flapping it’s wings in America can
make it rain in China). However, it’s impossible to calculate what the
consequences would be (as we see in this movie, where everything he does
ends up by making things worse). Maybe I wouldn’t have been in Mexico if
I had missed that train, but would I have been any worse off? Impossible
to say. A good reason not to regret things.

On a different note, I just started listening to the classical novel
“**Hunger**” (Sult) by [Knut
Hamsun](http://www.kirjasto.sci.fi/khamsun.htm). It’s a real classic,
but I haven’t read many of the Norwegian classics (I am glad they didn’t
force us to read much in school though, I might not have wanted to read
them now). I am listening to a radio recording (published on CD,
borrowed at my local library in Hamar, transferred to my MP3 and stored
until now - when can I download this in public domain? I mean it was
produced for the free tax-payer supported [public broadcasting in
Norway](http://www.nrk.no)). So far, I quite like it. It also talks a
lot about Oslo, it’s streets and houses, and I always like “place-bound”
books. It’s fun, since I’ve lived there myself. I want to find some
books like this about Toronto.

Finally, I am going to Mexico city tomorrow morning. Slightly
apprehensive, because it’s a monster of a city (20 million people, only
about 5 times my country), but excited to be seeing more of Mexico, and
to see my friend whom I haven’t seen in half a year. (Of course, among
my good friends, half a year counts as short time. Unfortunately.) I
will be living quite near [UNAM](http://www.unam.mx/) (Universidad
Nacional AutÃ³noma de MÃ©xico), which is possibly the largest university
in the world - they have 270,000 students! And 30,000 professors. Even
though a percentage of these are actually high-school students, since
the university also runs some high schools (as I understand), it’s still
impressive. They are the only Latin American university to rank on a
[top-50 list of world
universities](http://www.epfl.ch/soc/etudes/pdf/world-rankingsUnis.pdf)
(upz, PDF), of course these ratings don’t mean much, but still. I hope I
get a chance to pop by, maybe listen to a lecture or just walk around. I
always like visiting universities and libraries when I am in other
cities.

Stian
