---
title: Frosh nostalgia
created_at: Thu, 25 Aug 2005 22:27:00 +0000
kind: article
tags: personal, US
---

After having left my luggage safely in the hands of the kind populace of
Fayetteville, I trudged into town to explore. I quickly found the main
drag, Dickson street, got a free deodorant as a gift to incoming
freshman in the bookstore, and chanced upon the university. Not only did
they have a very kind policy of actively allowing random strangers to
use their computers, but the campus was also buzzing with life, because
it was the first day of school! After getting up to date on my emails, I
grabbed the free campus weekly, and sat on the outside steps of the
library, looking over Union Plaza I think it was called, onto the main
student center. There were students milling everywhere, lost freshmen
trying to find their classes, or supplies, or just a friendly hand to
hold. Sororities and fraternities, clubs and organizations promoting
themselves, the student association frying hamburgers on the square for
anyone who wanted them. It all reminded me wonderfully of my first
tentative days at UTSC about a year ago, fresh off the plane without a
student permit, trudging my 50kg backpack up the hill to the UTSC
campus. Ah, memories.

The next evening, I was checking my email in the living room of the kind
group of girls that had agreed to host me, while they were completing
their “moving in”, setting aside closets and lockers, deciding on house
rules, how much food would be bought collectively and how much
privately, planning dinners together and what not. Also this reminded me
not only of many wonderful past collectives, but also of my new home in
Augusta Ave. in Toronto with four others - we are moving in very soon,
and no doubt will we have the same discussions about sharing bread, and
who takes out the garbage.

Thank’s for having me, Fayetteville.

Stian
