---
title: "Newspaper Design: Awesome Polish Amnesty campaign over Belarus"
created_at: Fri, 16 Dec 2005 15:52:00 +0000
kind: article
tags:
- europe
- politics
---

![](http://www.newsdesigner.com/blog/images/nov05/gazet1t.jpg)I am very
intrigued by design, and think I recognize good one when I see it
(although I cannot for the life of me create it myself), and so I
thought it was interesting when I came across [a
blog](http://newsdesigner.com) that does nothing but post frontpages of
newspapers and discuss their design. I originally came there to look at
the [full page spread of King
Kong](http://www.newsdesigner.com/archives/002418.php), which apparently
caused quite a stir among the newspaper-design-aficionados. However,
browing further down the site I came across [this frontpage from Polish
newspapers, responding to a report by
Amnesty](http://www.newsdesigner.com/archives/002407.php) - they have
decided to “censor” the frontpage (which is found in full on page three,
page two is an analysis of the situation in Belarus). Of course, people
are talking about newspapers’ objectivity, and whether this is
appropriate, but I think as long as newspapers are honest, and share all
the facts, they are allowed to have an opinion. And if journalists don’t
have an opinion on censorship on the press, then were are we going to
wake up? So hurrah, Poland. And good luck Belarus!

Stian
