---
title: Spending money, difficult decisions
created_at: Sun, 18 Sep 2005 19:46:00 +0000
kind: article
tags:
  - economics
  - personal
  - tech
  - toronto
---

**Back**\
 So I am back in Toronto. It’s been a little over a week now, but it
seems a lot longer. From the day I arrived here, tired and dirty, with a
backpack full of laundry - to a room completely empty except for a
dresser. I gradually assembled some second-hand and free furniture, got
all my old stuff over from my friend, who had been storing it during the
summer, and slowly assembled a livable space. Now it’s quite nice in
here.

**Economics Choices**\
 I am usually OK at handling money - although far from great at it. I do
stupid stuff like spending five minutes trying to calculate which toilet
paper is cheapest (based on the prize divided by meters of paper), and
then buy a magazine that I could have just as well read in the library),
and sometimes I run out and have to borrow from my friends (thank you).
But generally, I end up spending more or less what I have. No credit
card debts, no car loans… But of course a huge student loan.

**Big Money Spending**\
 However, one thing that is really difficult for me is deciding when to
spend “big money”… like flying somewhere to see a friend, buying a big
ticket item, etc. This is all the more difficult because the money I
have is mostly a loan that I will have to pay back when I get a job
(hopefully), and I get my student loan in two big chunks, one each
semester. So suddenly you have this big chunk of money, that you haven’t
really earned or deserved, and that will one day have to be paid back.
Spending money on decent living, food etc, is obvious. But deciding to
fly to Mexico to see my friend for two weeks, even though I might “have
the money” right now, is far harder. As is deciding whether to buy a
digital camera or not. Especially because I don’t have any obvious
sources of income, and even though I “have the money now” — if I didn’t
use it, I might do something amazing with it next summer.

So I’ve been agonizing about this for a while. Which of course does not
mean that I’ve never spent big money. But I always spend lots of time
agonizing over it, and then in the end purchase things mostly on
impulse, as in, I’ve thought about this too long, I’ll just do it.

At least I am independent from my family, which is an important thing in
the culture that I come from. Since I turned 19 and graduated from high
school, they’ve basically never given me any money (except for Christmas
gifts and the like). This is of course made possible by the quite
generous Norwegian state student loans/scholar ships. And even though I
think I waste a lot of money, and buy useless things — looking back at
my post-high school life, I have done an incredible amount of traveling
and experiences.

**New Computer**\
 Either way, I just bought an iBook and an iPod. That’s what prompted
this entry. I am still not sure if it was a good decision (but sometimes
you just have to accept your decisions and move on), and it was
something I was thinking about for weeks. I had a lot of chance to play
with Macs during the summer, and got to really like them. I also needed
a new mp3 player since my trusted Creative Zen bit the grass, sadly. And
Apple, deviously, gives a 225\$ mail-in rebate if you purchase an iBook
and an iPod together. Thus - should I buy an iPod alone. What if I’d
want to buy an iBook later (say before I went on placement in 8 months),
then I’d loose the discount… Did I really need a laptop?

I thought about this, calculated my money, asked my friends. Finally,
about half an hour before the campus bookstore was closing, I decided to
only get an iPod. I didn’t need a laptop. I walked quickly down to the
bookstore, hoping it would still be open, and entered. And in a split
second, I decided to get the iBook too. 15 minutes later, I walked out
of there, one 12″ iBook and a 60gb iPod richer, \$1900 poorer (although
I’ll get \$225 back on the rebate). Excited, but very unsure. Then I had
to pay the tuition and suddenly I have very little money to live for
this term. Of course I’ll get by, especially if I get a job that I think
I will get. And I might sell some of my old equipment. And it is an
awesome piece of technology, and now that my house has broadband, it’s
great. But… was it the right choice?

**Alternatives**\
 And just chatting with one of my friends she characterized me as an
amazing spendthrift, because I got a mattress from free off the street,
and would rather walk 10km than take a cab. It’s weird, and I can’t
explain it. I just spent a huge amount of money on something nice, but
non-essential. Instead, I could have flown down to Mexico and seen my
best friend again like three times this year, or I could probably
single-handedly have build a school in a third world country. Or, or.

How are we supposed to make these decisions? What are the criteria? I
might have to spend more time working in a job that I won’t enjoy now -
so I just traded my spare time, for a computer… Am I that materialistic?

Still wondering,\
 Stian
