---
title: Color revolutions
created_at: Fri, 13 May 2005 17:47:00 +0000
kind: article
tags: politics
---

I have been very fascinated by the spread of peaceful revolutions around
the world during the last two years - starting with the [velvet
revolution in
Georgia](http://edition.cnn.com/2003/WORLD/europe/11/23/otsc.dougherty/)
a bit over two years ago, the [Orange
revolution](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orange_Revolution) in
[Ukraine](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ukraine) about half a year ago,
the [Cedar revolution](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cedar_Revolution) in
[Lebanon](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lebanon) some months ago and the
[Pink
revolution](http://www.washtimes.com/op-ed/20050324-075950-9368r.htm) in
[Kyrgyzstan](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kyrgyzstan). The latest was
especially interesting to me since I spent a few weeks in Kyrgyzstan
some years ago ([nice picture of me and some Kyrgyz
friends](http://frida.prio.no/private/s/pictures/kazakhstan-published/kirgizfriends2.jpg))
- looking at the TV news and seeing the main square in Bishkek with
people overthrowing their president that had ruled since independence in
1991, and had no plans of relinquishing power, was a great feeling.

However, Kyrgyzstan was always regarded as the most liberal of the CIS
states, and Uzbekistan is quite far on the other side of the scale
(although not as far as Turkmenistan). Now, [things are stirring in
Uzbekistan](http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/asia-pacific/4542783.stm)
as well, and it’s coming from a city that is right across from Osh,
where the Kyrgyz revolution started. If I were Karimov, I would be
worried. Of course, Western governments are worried as well - this is an
Islamic uprising, and if they did indeed manage to oust Karimov, their
rule would be more religious than the previous (kind of what is
happening in Iraq). However, it seems that Western governments if slowly
realizing that a democratically elected and accountable Islamic party,
like in Turkey, might be preferable to a unpopular foreign-supported
dictator. Let’s hope this turns out well.

As an aside, [the Guardian](http://www.guardian.co.uk) has [a very
interesting
article](http://www.guardian.co.uk/ukraine/story/0,15569,1482868,00.html)
about how the Orange revolution was “staged” - part Adbusters, part
Lovefestival and part Lenin, quite a mix… Is this the future recipe for
uprisings?

Stian
