---
title: "Chinese politicians on the internet: Fu Rong"
created_at: Mon, 27 Mar 2006 04:13:00 +0000
kind: article
tags:
- asia
- media
- politics
- tech
---

![](http://houshuang.org/blog/files/china_ill.jpg)[EastSouthWestNorth](http://www.zonaeuropa.com/weblog.htm)
has long been among my favorite blogs about China, providing real
insights into the media and internet world by posting long translations
of newspaper articles, forum postings and the like. That’s where I got
the story of Fu Rong, the mayor of Lingao in
[Hainan](http://wikipedia.org/wiki/Hainan), who logged on to one of the
most popular discussion sites in China, [Tianya](http://www.tianya.cn)
under his real name, and started to communicate with the users. At first
they were shocked, and refused to believe that he was who he said he
was, but the forum called his office and confirmed that it was him. He
even left a cell phone number, inviting people to call him with ideas
and suggestions. Since then, there have been many discussion threads in
the forum, and the users have treated him surprisingly “civilized” while
he was finding his ropes in the internet world. (See [ESWNs translation
of an article from South China
Daily](http://www.zonaeuropa.com/20060325_1.htm), my favorite Chinese
weekly newspaper).

During the national People’s Congress meetings,
[Danwei](http://www.danwei.org), another must read on media in China,
who even started putting short TV shows online, talked about the [blog
aggregator](http://www.danwei.org/archives/002444.html) put together by
China Daily. Many of the delegates (about 3000 if memory serves me
right) to the conference were blogging, and often the comment sections
had hundres of comments. How sincere the attempt to engage with the
citizens is, is of course debatable, and I am not raving about this as
some great democratization. But it is a very interesting phenomenon, and
at least in the case of Fu Rong, he seems to be very sincere. It’s
always fun when China can “show the way” in uptake of new technology
uses as well.

Stian\
 *Over at [Arab E-Gov, they’re saying: in China, politicians are
blogging, what about
us?](http://arab-e-gov.blogspot.com/2006/03/in-china-egovernment-via-blogging-what.html)\
 Photo by jfrichard*
