---
title: Taiwanese students want value for their money
created_at: Tue, 28 Mar 2006 17:24:00 +0000
kind: article
tags: asia
---

[![](http://houshuang.org/blog/files/pizzahutsalad.jpg)](http://www.start.com.my/blog/maximizing-your-roi-at-pizza-hut/#more-421)I
remember the one time I went to PizzaHut in Wuhan, China, with some of
my students. PizzaHut is extremely expensive in China, similar to a
7-course fancy restaurant in the west (compared to income), and they
clearly wanted to make the best out of it. We got two salad plates that
we could put as much as we wanted on, but we could only fill them once.
I went first, and put a bunch of stuff (I thought), but my friends at
the table were not too convinced. They then sent a delegation of Chinese
students, and they built a whole structure on the plate to get more
salad. They however, were dwarfed by these thrifty students from Taiwan
(courtesy of
[blewtooth](http://www.start.com.my/blog/maximizing-your-roi-at-pizza-hut/#more-421))
that made salad-tower-building into a new art form.

I also remember that getting a cheese-less pizza (being a vegan) was not
easy, the waitress completely refused, but I relented, and finally she
went to ask the chef. I was finally given one, but with the comment that
they would not extend their “taste guarantee” to this one. Funny, given
that I routinely bought cheeseless pizzas at PizzaHut in Sweden, with no
hubbub. Then again, my friend from Hangzhou told me she had worked at
PizzaHut, and the hygiene behind the counter was horrible (as in, upz I
dropped a pizza on the floor, oh well, put it back on the tray)…

Stian\
 *If you were inspired,
[here](http://www.fincher.org/Misc/Pennies/Sent4.shtml) are some cool
pictures of toy stacking. A new way of procrastinating, yahoo! Never did
know what to do with all those pesky pennies…*
