---
title: Amazing pictures of high-density in Hong Kong
created_at: 2006-03-14 00:00:00 -0500
kind: article
tags:
- asia
- canada
- toronto
---

![](http://www.spaceandculture.org/wolf_hongkong.jpg)I came across an
interesting collection of [photos of high-density housing in Hong
Kong](http://www.photomichaelwolf.com/hongkongarchitecture) (thank you,
[Spacing Toronto](http://spacing.ca/wire/?p=616)), some very aesthetic
pictures. I haven’t spend much time in Hong Kong, and don’t understand
the city as I wish I did, but these pictures made me think of something.
When discussing the past, present and future of Toronto, the issue of
density is omnipresent; personally I am a big fan of higher density in
general, for many reasons. It provides access to services, cultures and
amenities in an easily accessible, walkable climate that is easy to
serve efficiently with public transit. It also reduces the amount of
agricultural or forested land that is paved over. However, many would
point to the coldness of the towers at Bay street, and contrast them
with the nice houses that line many of Toronto’s downtown streets, their
obvious point being that they don’t want to live in a cold city.

Yet, what struck me is that there are few cities as “in your face” and
“hot”, with a bustling, teeming life on street level that can be quite
exhausting when you first arrive. I am not suggesting turning Toronto
into Hong Kong right away (then again…), but perhaps this provides a
different model of densification than do the corporate offices on Bay
street, and the condos on Front street.

Stian
