---
title: MA program in free software development
created_at: Sat, 22 Sep 2007 01:30:00 +0000
kind: article
tags:
- India
---

So, I am back in Toronto - have been for about two weeks, but am still
busy finding my bearings. I have a busy year ahead of me, preparing to
write my thesis on community libraries in Indonesia (I might blog more
about that later), TAing for a [course on international communications
and international
development](http://www.utsc.utoronto.ca/~chan/istb01), taking a class
in हिन्दी (Hindi) which is very exciting, and of course attending the
[open education
course](http://opencontent.org/wiki/index.php?title=Intro_Open_Ed_Syllabus).
The readings are about 150 pages per week, and I have not been able to
do them for the last three weeks, because of moving and trying to get my
life in order… So this will be a productive weekend.

The problem with the readings is that it’s almost impossible to do them
without looking up references and projects mentioned - whether it’s the
[blog of Deputy Director General Øystein Johannessen at the Norwegian
Ministry of Education and Research](http://oysteinj.typepad.com/), who
promisingly seems very interested in
[OER](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_educational_resources), the
[National Knowledge Commission for
India](http://knowledgecommission.gov.in/) (playing around with Hindi as
well) or an [MA program in free software
development](http://oss2005.case.unibz.it/Papers/OES/EK3.pdf). It’s all
interesting, but I need to get through the readings, somehow…

Stian
