---
title: "OpenEd: Week 13"
created_at: Tue, 27 Nov 2007 17:53:00 +0000
kind: article
tags: []
---

[![](http://farm1.static.flickr.com/78/211749949_756ad979d5_m.jpg)The
OpenCourseWars](http://opencontent.org/docs/future-history-of-oer.pdf "http://opencontent.org/docs/future-history-of-oer.pdf")
(Wiley, 13 pages)**

*QUESTIONS: What will the future of higher education look like? What
impact will the open education movement have? How will we get there from
here? What will be the effects of open education movement upon K-12
education? (alessandro giorni) What will be the effects of open
education movement upon high school education? (emanuela z.) What role
can OERs play in developing countries? (Stian Haklev)*

Lot’s of interesting questions that I have been thinking about for a
long time, not the least throughout this course.

**Unpacking the university**

![](http://farm1.static.flickr.com/122/309527777_01a0c4dcc0_m.jpg)One of
the key ideas that I tried to bring across to my students during the
lecture I recently gave was that the concept of a university as it
exists at a given time in for example Canada is the product of
historical, economical, political and structural factors (and probably
some randomness), and that it is not “God-given”, that there are other
ways of gaining higher knowledge than sitting in lecture theaters in old
brick buildings doing four year degrees. Many things that determined the
physical structure of a university are changing - it used to be that you
needed a huge research library to be a world class university, and to be
able to sustain that, you needed a certain enrollment size. With the
gradual digitalization of resources, that is no longer so true, and
might soon be wholly irrelevant. There is a lot of debris in the current
model, and I think we need to go back to the roots and look at what we
really want university to do for us, and how that can best be
accomplished.

**The degree structure**

![](http://farm1.static.flickr.com/34/93828022_c40c635786_m.jpg)So on
one hand you have the physical properties, everyone knows what a
university is “supposed to look like”. On the other hand you have the
structure of the programs, courses, regulations etc. In a similar vein
to what I stated above, there is nothing “written in stone” about four
year undegraduate degrees, MAs and PhDs, lectures and tutorials, five
courses at a time, midterms, finals, GPAs and so on (this is written
with a North American perspective on purpose, because they are the ones
who tend to think the least about other systems of learning). I could
write a lot about the Swedish model,
![](http://farm1.static.flickr.com/216/472799243_470f4d10eb_m.jpg)which
is not radically different, but just the concept of only teaching one
course at a time (half a year of anthropology, a year of psychology, etc
- with enough breadth, depth and credits you get your BA - no majors or
minors), which usually ends with a 5-8 hour exam, that often has two or
three questions on it, is quite different.

**Inflation of degrees**

This is a problem that has been much discussed. The idea that the bar is
pushed always higher - but not because we’re a “knowledge society” or
what have you, but because of competition. Apparently they need an
undergrad degree to work at Wal-Mart in China now, not because it is
useful, but because competition is so high that you might as well hire
the ones with degrees. In most Western countries, governments are aiming
to put 50% of the young population through higher education (and even
community colleges are starting to look increasingly like universities),
but there is no way that these societies provide that amount of jobs
requiring a university degree. Even our new principal at UTSC stated
that a Masters is the new BA Honors. To me, this is a huge waste of
societal resources, and the drive to get higher degrees by people who
couldn’t care less about what they are learning, and will not be
applying it, is ruining higher ed for everyone who actually give a damn
(admittedly not many).

**Accreditation**

![](http://farm1.static.flickr.com/153/425051782_1853c3bf93_m.jpg)Which
brings me to a related issue, accreditation. As there are more and more
ways of learning online, by distance, by alternative courses and
self-chosen paths, should we institute new ways of accrediting people? I
have written earlier about the idea of splitting Harvard into two
independent parts, one teaching and one accrediting, and about the
Indian NGO that waged a campaign against accreditation in the first
place. Wouldn’t it be wonderful if universities didn’t have the role to
sort people, but rather to make all students learn and improve their own
skills and understanding, and the way you proved to a company that you
were worth hiring as by the actual work that you had done. As the open
source idea extends to ever more domains, people might be participating
in Wikipedia, writing open source textbooks, composing music, shooting
footages for a collectively produced documentary… All this could be part
of a portfolio of skills. Or would we have certifications, like we have
for certain professions now? Instead of a bar exam, would an English
major have to write an English lit certification test?

![](http://farm1.static.flickr.com/98/237561007_8b09d74e54_m.jpg)Part of
the problem is that there is a confusion between process and outcome. If
we could define what exactly we wanted students to have gained at the
end of a university period, then we could sit down and say “How do we
best design a course of study that will provide these skills”, and we
could presumably also measure it to a certain degree of accuracy.
However, much of the thinking around higher education seems to start at
the other end, with a pre-defined idea of a university (and idea that we
tinker with, but never really rethink), and then asking ourselves “What
can the students learn within this pre-ordained institution, and how
will we measure it”. In fact, what we want is for students to be in a
creative learning environment, one that forces them to think and
reflect, and rub shoulders with scholars and peers, for four years.
There are several studies showing that many students haven’t even
significantly improved their creative thinking skills after four years,
but we don’t mind, because we already know that this is the right thing
for students. Colored of course by our romantization of own periods of
college way back when, and the glorification of higher learning by mass
culture (whether because of insights or party culture, it’s still “the
place to be!”).

In this regard, I kind of like the Swedish model. In the beginning of
the year they give you the curriculum, perhaps 3000 pages or so that
you’ll need to read and understand well over the next four months. They
give you the date for the final exam, and that’s it. There are lectures
of course, to help you understand the readings, but no attendance is
taken. You are assumed to be an adult, and if you believe going to Bali
and spending four months there reading the material
![](http://farm1.static.flickr.com/95/250686996_18b55710b5_m.jpg)and
thinking about it will let you understand Descartes or the history of
England better, then be my guest. You are taking the same (8 hours, two
questions) exam in the end, and the university is confident that it is
able to separate who has learnt something from who hasn’t. Indeed, I did
just this, I did all the credits for my second year of Chinese (full
time) while in China learning Chinese. I certainly learnt a lot more
than had I been in class in Sweden - is there any reason I should not
have gotten those marks, just because I was not present in class?

(I used the analogy of the TOEFL to my students - what if the University
of Toronto said that the only way they could ensure that you had a good
understanding of English was if you had spent one year at a certain
specific school… Instead, the TOEFL allows you to learn English any way
you want, through any number of institutions, self-learning, getting a
foreign girlfriend, watching Hollywood movies, working as a maid in
England - and in the end, it’s wholly irrelevant. You don’t even put
down on paper where you learnt English, because they trust that the test
accurately shows your command of English. (How accurate it is, is
another matter). I obviously understand that testing knowledge in
history is a lot more complicated than the TOEFL, but it would be a
strange thing indeed if we just gave up on it…

**Improved teaching**

![](http://farm1.static.flickr.com/8/8173741_d36a4e7d36_m.jpg)I have
been mostly very disappointed by the pedagogics (or andragogics) of
university teaching. Earlier in history, university was for the absolute
elite, who wanted to fill a few positions, including becoming academics.
It was a kind of apprenticeship to be a professor, and thus professors
didn’t really have to be experts at pedagogics. Right now, we are
putting millions of people through first year courses in economics and
history, with professors who have never learnt anything about
pedagogics. I would love more peer-review in teaching, teachers sitting
in on each other’s classes, giving each other feedback. While this might
be difficult to do in the real world (although I don’t know why),
filming of lectures and putting them online can actually help this
process - you are exposed to a number of teaching styles and can adopt
one that suits you, etc.

However, in this network age, the concept of 1000 students sitting in
front of a professor speaking in a mike and showing Powerpoint slides is
quite outdated. I realized this summer at iCommons that there was no
point in going to the big sessions. Even though the presenters were
blockbuster names like Lawrence Lessig and Cory Doctorow, I realized
that I didn’t get much more out of these sessions than I got from
watching their lectures online. So I instead went for the smaller group
sessions on education, where we all discussed intensely in breakout
groups and came up with things together. This was a much more rational
use of my few days in Dubrovnik. The same holds true for education. I
remember reading about a professor of physics who recorded lectures
especially for them to be put online, and then used the time he was
allotted with the class to do experiments with them, having groups work
and then circulate to help them. I would argue that this is a much more
rational way of using the very expensive face time allotted with a
professor.

**Distance ed / computer mediated learning**\
 ![](http://farm1.static.flickr.com/32/66165381_34f63aa27b_m.jpg)I am
very interested in hybrid models that mix online and offline lectures.
Imagine having a number of students at University of Toronto sign up for
a class at Tokyo University. We would do the readings, watch the online
lectures, and then meet in a colloquium at University of Toronto,
perhaps even with a teaching assistant to help us, and discuss questions
together. I mentioned above putting “canned content” online, so that you
can spend your time interacting with students. I’ve found this in my own
tutorials this year, when I stop standing in front of class and going
through the assignments, and I give them free time to work on their
projects and ask me questions, I circulate and discuss their different
projects, help by asking them questions and forcing them to think deeper
about what they are doing. That was a great learning experience for them
(and for me, I think), and a much better use of my time.

![](http://farm1.static.flickr.com/55/105627163_54799aabcf_m.jpg)But
distance education also has the potential to widen access to learning
for people who for many different reasons do not have access today. I
consciously write learning, because I don’t want distance ed to become
an excuse to force 100% of the population to go through higher
education. There are lot’s of exciting models currently happening in
developing (and developed countries), and this course (which I showed to
my students) is a great example that a distance learning course doesn’t
have to be just a little professor in a black window on your screen
talking for two hours, but can be highly interactive.\
 **Impact of open educational resources**

![](http://farm1.static.flickr.com/115/296553221_ac57454405_m.jpg)I
think OERs are going to play a huge role in all of this. To me, one of
the most important OERs are actually academic articles and monographs.
When they are freed up, we then need to provide the “glue” - lenses or
playlists of good articles for a given topic at a given level, and
perhaps background, explanation and analysis that helps students
understand the articles. In addition we need the infrastructure for open
learning - we need platforms where students can form learning networks,
collaborate on course material, communicate with mentors (how this is
financed is another chapter, whether through user fees or state
sponsorship or exchange - I tutor you in something and someone else
tutors me in something else) remains to be seen. All models will
probably be tested.

I am not going to write anything more about OERs right now, because I
believe
![](http://farm2.static.flickr.com/1135/1437417557_f2c5024c2b_m.jpg)we’ve
covered it very well so far in the course, and I will not even answer my
own question or write anything about K-12, but I will wait to see what
others write, and come back to it next week. For now, I wanted to share
the thoughts above with you.

And this afternoon I am off to Zagreb for the [Open Translation Tools
conference](http://www.aspirationtech.org/events/opentranslation), which
is very exciting, and certainly has a lot of promise for localization of
OERs as well.

Stian*\
 (thanks to [Ozyman](http://www.flickr.com/photos/ozyman/),
[jahdakine](http://www.flickr.com/photos/jahdakinebrah),
[-sel](http://www.flickr.com/photos/-sel-/),
[dachalan](http://www.flickr.com/photos/54945394@N00/),
[paprikaplain](http://www.flickr.com/photos/23883605@N00/),
[tanakawho](http://www.flickr.com/photos/28481088@N00),
[kurafire](http://www.flickr.com/photos/kurafire/),
[clickybd](http://www.flickr.com/photos/clickykbd/),
[Pandian](http://www.flickr.com/photos/pandiyan/), [Darwin
Bell](http://www.flickr.com/photos/darwinbell/) and [Shanti
ॐ](http://www.flickr.com/photos/shanti183), all at flickr, for the
pictures)***
