---
title: Learn Swedish
created_at: 2007-12-07 00:00:00 -0500
kind: article
tags:
- europe
- politics
---

![](http://images.amazon.cn/m/md_bkbk621244.jpg)I don’t know why, but
the Swedes produce a lot of good speakers. Hopefully most of you have
already seen one of Hans Rossling’s presentation, if not
[here](http://www.ted.com/index.php/talks/view/id/140) is one from TED
2007. And just today, through [Eirik Newth’s
blog](http://newth.net/eirik/2007/12/07/vet-du-hvem-som-leder-india-og-kina/),
I found a link to [Fredrik Härén](http://interesting.org/), a Swedish
guy who went to China to teach creativity after the dot-com crash.
Apparently he learnt more about creativity than he had expected, and now
he is back in Sweden trying to ask people to wake up and learn more
about the world around us. He askes a full delegation of Sweden’s
leading educators, media people and thinkers “Who are the leaders of
China and India”, a few people know, “What are ten leading Chinese and
Indian brands”, nobody knows… He also says a lot of good things about
what creativity is composed of, how Sweden is lacking a great national
idea or vision to work towards, and closes by exhorting Sweden to
“become a developing country again”. Unfortunately the whole thing is in
Swedish, so the few of you who don’t speak that lovely language will be
left out cold. He has written a bunch of books though, available in many
languages (Chinese version pictured here). I might put it up on dotsub
and subtitle it this winter, if I have time and inspiration. ([Here’s
the second talk](http://youtube.com/watch?v=t210BTHEcLU) he gave at the
same place).

Stian
