---
title: Many great free textbooks from India
created_at: Sun, 06 Apr 2008 19:42:00 +0000
kind: article
tags:
- books
- India
---

![](http://lh3.google.com/shaklev/R_kYEM8pN0I/AAAAAAAABYI/rrMCPhLSOBs/s288/2504dad3_Picture2020.jpg)I
have written about the plan to buy the copyright for textbooks in
Indonesia and publish the books online
([here](http://reganmian.net/blog/2008/02/08/indonesian-government-wants-to-buy-text-book-copyrights/),
and
[here](http://reganmian.net/blog/2008/03/27/indonesian-government-buys-books-copyrights-update/)).
Today I found out, through the excellent Indian book blog [Scholars
Without
Borders](http://swblogs.blogspot.com/2008/01/indian-textbooks-rule.html)
that [the Indian National Council on Educational Research and
Training](http://www.ncert.nic.in) (NCERT) offers free downloadable
versions of many Indian K-12 text books. From [this
page](http://www.ncert.nic.in/textbooks/testing/Index.htm), you can
choose which year, and which subject, and receive the title desired. The
first thing you get is a PDF with the contents, and at first I was very
disappointed thinking that was the only thing I’d get, about to give up.
Then I realized that the TOC is hyperlinked to the individual PDFs for
the different chapters. However, these hyperlinks did not work neither
in Preview nor in [Skim](http://skim-app.sourceforge.net/), which I
usually use - I had to download Acrobat Reader to view them. I hope at
some point they will make available direct links to the different
chapters, or better yet, a zip file containing the whole book, for
offline reading (also beneficial to those with slow internet).

The books themselves seem great. They have text books for the subjects
English, Hindi and Urdu, and for many subjects they also offer a Hindi
or an English version, which often seem to be identical. There are all
kinds of reasons to applaud this. As a student of Hindi, I love reading
the readers made for the initial grades (with beautiful illustrations!),
and as I move up, I can use the texts in parallel, reading the Hindi and
checking with the English that I understood. Just like I suggested that
the huge amount of OpenCourseWare films of classroom lectures from all
around the world, especially China and India, might be a gigantic boon
to a comparative curriculum researcher, these text books would also be
great for someone studying curriculum and pedagogics in India. Something
similar to Bjarne Skov’s [very interesting analysis of elementary school
textbooks in Panjab,
Pakistan](http://wo.uio.no/as/WebObjects/theses.woa/wa/these?WORKID=59612)
(in Norwegian).

The thing that would make these books incredibly more useful though, is
if they were affixed with a [Creative
Commons](http://www.creativecommons.org) license, which enabled other
people to use the material and creative derivatives. This would enable
me to use parts of it in my own text books, translate the text, use
illustrations in Wikipedia articles, etc. There might even be a lot of
Indian NGOs that wish to use part of the material, but change it in
different ways to make it more locally appropriate. Licensing it under
CC would be great, but it’s not enough however. The final step is to
make available the source files that were used in generating the PDFs,
whether those are Photoshop Layers, or InDesign files. Otherwise it will
be very difficult to for example translate the text, but keep the nice
background illustrations.

I hope someone like the great Sarai Foundation or Creative Commons India
can talk to NCERT and see if this can be pushed through. I don’t even
know if these books were written by NCERT staff, or commissioned from
outside writers, who owns the copyright etc. Either way, they are
beautiful, and I recommend you have a look at them. If projects from
around the world write NCERT and tell them they love the books, but
would like them to be freely licensed, that might trigger some Indian
pride in a positive way.

Stian
