---
title: 27 female edubloggers from ZaidLearn
created_at: 2008-10-09 00:00:00 -0400
kind: article
tags:
  - []
---

[Zaid Ali Alsagoff](http://zaidlearn.blogspot.com/), who has an
intriguing Norwegian connection, has carved out a neat niche in the
edublogger community, providing colorful and interesting slideshows on
different topics, whether it be Web 2.0 educational tools, lists of
edubloggers, or other resource collections. He has even published a
book, called [69 learning adventures in 6
galaxies](http://zaidlearn.blogspot.com/2008/08/69-learning-adventures-in-6-galaxies-my.html),
available for free online.

A while back, he put out a [slideshow with 25 27
edubloggers](http://zaidlearn.blogspot.com/2008/09/25-edublogs-you-simply-dont-want-to.html)
that he liked (and I was honored to be part of that list). In the
comments, it was pointed out that all but two three were men, and some
discussion ensued about why this was, whether this was important or not,
etc. In a constructive spirit that I really admire, Zaid said: OK, fine,
I will go find a bunch of great female bloggers, and post them here
(paraphrased :)). And so he did:

[27 Inspiring Women
Edubloggers](http://www.slideshare.net/zaid/27-inspiring-women-edubloggers-presentation?type=powerpoint "27 Inspiring Women Edubloggers")

View SlideShare
[presentation](http://www.slideshare.net/zaid/27-inspiring-women-edubloggers-presentation?type=powerpoint "View 27 Inspiring Women Edubloggers on SlideShare")
or [Upload](http://www.slideshare.net/upload?type=powerpoint) your own.
(tags: [education](http://slideshare.net/tag/education)
[women](http://slideshare.net/tag/women))

![](http://counters.gigya.com/wildfire/IMP/CXNID=2000002.0NXC/bT*xJmx*PTEyMjM2MTAxMTA3NzQmcHQ9MTIyMzYxMDExNjA2NSZwPTEwMTkxJmQ9Jm49Jmc9MiZ*PSZvPTllYmY2NzIxYjY1ZTRlNGQ5MTE*MGM1OGZjNmQ3MzYz.gif)Although
I would certainly never choose not to read a good blog because it was
written by a woman, when reflecting I realized that many of the blogs I
read in the edublogger sphere were indeed written by men (while in the
library blogosphere there seem to be a lot more women). This is also
interesting since there are probably much more women who work in the
education sector than men…. do they blog less, do they promote their
blogs less, are their blogs qualitatively different from male blogs, do
male bloggers link to them less frequently?

I don’t know the answer to any of these questions, but one tiny
observation that I made when looking through the last slideshow, was the
number of bloggers that had a URL under some blog hosting company (for
example edublog.blogspot.com or miasteaching.wordpress.com - fictional
examples), as opposed to their own hosted domain (miasteaching.org). I
did a quick count, and from what I saw, in the first list (almost all
male), 17 out of 25 had some kind of personal URL, whereas among the
all-female list, only 4 (of which two were hosted at their company) had
a personal URL.

No hard and fast conclusions to draw from that, this is obviously not a
representative sample, but I wonder if it means anything… That the men
are more focused on promoting themselves as a brand, whereas the women
are more interested in communicating? Or the men are more interested in
the technical challenges of hosting their own domain?

I am not trying to essentialize, but I wonder if there is some kind of a
trend here. Just thinking.

anyway, kudos to Zaid, and [my poor Google
Reader](https://www.google.com/reader/shared/10419021005107099820) who
is now bursting in the seams

Stian
