---
title: Some observations and suggestions about the Rural China Education Foundation library programs at two rural sites
created_at: 2008-06-02 00:00:00 -0400
kind: article
tags:
  - china
  - development
  - libraries
  - personal
---

*Below is a brief report I wrote for Rural China Education Foundation,
based on my visits to two field sites, where they are experimenting with
starting rural school libraries. This report was written for RCEF and
based on their needs, and my observations. I am releasing it publicly,
because it might offer interesting ideas or insights to others. I have
anonymized the site locations, and the persons involved. Any information
about RCEF programs can be gotten through their
[website](http://ruralchina.org).*

![](http://reganmian.net/blog/files/frontpage.jpg)

**Introduction**

In May 2008, I visited two Rural China Education Foundation field sites.
I wanted to examine the evolution of their relatively recent library
programs, and see if I could make any suggestions. Site 1 was located in
Shangdong province, and Site 2 in Shanxi.

**My involvement**\
 I spent six full days in Site 1, arriving on May 6th and leaving on May
12th. I lived in an empty house behind the village head’s house. I spent
four days at the primary school, listening in on classes, and talking to
students and teachers. I also taught a few English classes, and
participated in a parents-teacher meeting. I met with the reading
committee three times, and the reading committee arranged for me to meet
with a number of readers from the village at a “mass meeting” in the
school. I was supposed to do an English corner in the weekend, but I
think the information was poorly announced, and only one student showed
up.

I spent May 13th to 20th at Site 2 school. I lived in an office at the
village government compound, and spent all my time at the school. I
listened in on classes, taught a few classes, observed students using
the library, and spent a lot of time talking to the RCEF volunteers
there, as well as talking to the teachers and interacting with the
students. Together with the RCEF volunteers, I also visited a farmer’s
organization in a nearby village, including their library, and their
handweaving cooperative.

**Outline**\
 I will describe each field site, the current library situation as I
perceived and was told, and the feedback that I received from the
teachers, children and villagers at each place. At the end, I will
provide some of my own suggestions for the future. I will provide more
background information about Site 1 than about Site 2, because there are
permanent RCEF volunteers at Site 2 that understand the place very well.
Note that much of what I report here is what I have been told by only
one informant, and might not be correct - it should be quite clear what
is based on my own observation, and what I was told. As for my
suggestions, evaluating whether they are appropriate or not is dependent
on a deeper understanding of the teachers, students and villagers, and
they are offered with the hope that RCEF members will be able to
evaluate which might be practicable and not based on their deeper
understanding of the dynamics at the field sites than I was able to
gain.\
 \
 **Report from Site 1**

**Village**\
 ![](http://reganmian.net/blog/files/machine.jpg)There are officially
1400 inhabitants in the village, but actually 1800 - 400 are
“unregistered”.  About 70% of the families are economically doing well,
and 30% are not doing so well. Many of the older people are illiterate
(half of the over 60’s, some of the over 40’s). There are large gaps in
education between men and women among older people.  The head of the
village took over as village head in 2001 when they began with
democratic elections. The economic situation has improved after they
began a market for used machine parts from factories. Shandong is richer
than the Western provinces, but Site 1 is in one of the poorest corners
of Shandong. According to the principal at the primary school, the
villagers that do farming and trading make at least 30,000 yuan per
year, whereas the villagers who only do farming might make as little as
10,000 yuan per year. There are lots of opportunities for “dagong”
(looking for factory jobs etc) in the area, so not many migrate far
away.

**Village head**\
 The head of the village lives in a very simple house - the principal,
who is a friend of him, says that if he had not been a village head, he
could have made a lot of money, and that his poverty was proof that he
wasn’t corrupt. He has a lot of books and magazines about development of
the countryside lying around, the old guys from the reading committee
seemed to often hang out there, and read some of the material. He has
been five years in the army, and lived in many places in China. He says
he is the most highly educated at his age in the village.

**School system**\
 There is an elementary school in Site 1. The middle school is very
close by. The high school is in a township, not that far away. Finally,
there are about 20 university students in the village.

Since last year, the schools don’t require any student fees (which the
principal was proud about), only 15-20 RMB per year for the notebooks
(the textbooks are free). According to the principal, there was
virtually 100% enrollment in primary and secondary school. As for high
school (gaozhong), he said that any student that wanted, could get in,
but many parents chose to keep the children at home to put them to work
when they reached that level. There are also a bit more boys than girls
attending high school, but the situation is better than before.

**Elementary school**\
 ![](http://reganmian.net/blog/files/kids-square.jpg)The principal also
teaches science. He has gone to the RCEF training in Beijing, and was
proud of being a “member” of RCEF. The school has 13 teachers, 10 are
“real” teachers with more or less than a specialization in teaching,
whereas 3 are “daike laoshi” - villagers that don’t have any higher
education or teacher training, and are paid much less (280 yuan per
month). The teachers are paid between 1000 and 1700 yuan per month. The
schedule is daily from about 7:30 to 12, then a three hour break when
the students and teachers return home to eat and sleep, and teaching
proceeds again from 15 to 18 - 18:30. I asked if some of the time during
the “lunch break” could be used for activities, but they said that was
very difficult, everyone wanted to eat and sleep.

The school has 200 students (counting the kindergarten), and has won the
best school in the district for the last 7 years, which they are very
proud of. It is also the smallest school in the district. Many students
from other areas would like to enroll, but are unable to, since it is
based on where you live.

A very positive aspect is that they seem to really encourage continual
improvement and peer-critique, with a system of teachers listening in on
other teachers’ classes (sometimes even across schools). During the last
teachers’ meeting on Friday, they distributed who would listen in on
whose classes during the next week. I never heard anyone provide
feedback on what they had seen though - but this might be done in
private to save face, etc. The principal presented it as the school
having always been quite good, open-minded, etc, but with the RCEF
volunteers in the summer, they had received a “real boost”. His
superior, who was visiting to listen in on classes, also said that he
noted a “new atmosphere” in the school after the RCEF summer volunteers
- hard to tell if he was being sincere though.

One teacher I talked to, when asked what he wanted in terms of future
training, said he would love to visit other schools to see how they
teach - especially city schools.

**Use of computers**\
 They have two computers, with a quite fast internet connection. The
teachers stated that they often used the internet to look up information
etc. However, they did not seem very internet savvy, and I am sure some
training in information finding, judging what material is reliable, etc,
would be useful. They also have incredibly slow typing speeds - the
principal spent a lot of time typing up a report or something. Some of
the more wealthy villagers also have computers (I visited one such
family - according to their bookmarks, they mainly watched movies
online, and got information about weather etc). The cheapest computers
cost around 3000 yuan, but according to the principal, a larger obstacle
was the fee to connect the computers to the internet, which might be
more than 1000 RMB per year.

**Impressions of RCEF volunteers**\
 Everyone I met seemed to be very excited about the RCEF volunteers that
had been there in the summer (zhijiao). They showed me lot’s of
pictures, and always talked about them. Especially an American volunteer
came up a lot, and I was often asked if I knew him. The students said
they had liked the volunteers a lot, especially the fun English classes
and the hands-on science classes. They also believed that the teachers
were getting “better and better” since the RCEF volunteers had been
there. (Their main complaint was against teachers that used physical
punishment frequently).

**Library**

The library was started by RCEF volunteers from Shandong university in
March 2008.

**Custodian\
**If I understood correctly, there was originally an older teacher who
lives in the school building (the only one) who was in charge of the
library, however - possible because he or someone in his family had been
sick for a month, and he had been away - the main responsibility now
seemed to rest on a young local teacher.

**Physical location**\
 ![](http://reganmian.net/blog/files/g-library.jpg)The library is stored
in a small room with two shelves. The room is kept locked and the young
teacher, as well as some from the reading committee (dushihui) have
keys. The books all seemed to be in very good condition (not strange
since the library has not been open for very long). The library holds
books both for children and for adults in the village. Each book is
marked with a category, and a unique number.

**Procedure for students**\
 The students are not allowed into the room, but every Wednesday they
can choose from a list of the whole book collection - a teacher then
goes and fetches the book immediately. This list only contains the code
(including the category), the title of the book, and the price.
Currently there is only one printed list in the entire school. I never
got to witness the actual distribution, but it seems clear from
interviews that the teacher handling the distribution - often the young
teacher - plays a guiding role in the selection, for example suggesting
certain books that might be relevant to their studies and preventing
them from accessing books that she deems inappropriate for them (for
example books about ghosts or other scary things). They said that in the
future each teacher would have a copy of the list, and would perhaps be
able to arrange borrowing for his/her own class. All borrowings are
written in a notebook, with the name of the student, and the name/number
of the book borrowed. This makes it very easy to get a quick count of
how many books have been borrowed (the students and teachers are noted
in one side of the book, and starting from behind, are the names of the
villagers, and the books they have borrowed).

The students do not pay deposits for the books, but they have to pay the
cost of a book if it is lost. This has happened one time so far. Some
secondary school students who know about the library also come directly
to the young teacher to borrow books.

**Feedback from students**\
 They like to read tonghuashu (children’s stories), gushishu (story
books) and zuowenshu (essay books?). When shown examples, these
categories looked very similar to me, but I was told by the students
that zuowenshu can help them with their schoolwork. One of the common
desires of the students is that they be able to enter the library. They
would also like more books - since some of the most popular are often
lent to someone else. They would all like to be able to read magazines,
and their families never bought them any. I asked if they had any books
in their homes, and they all said that there were no books, except for
school textbooks. They had been to the bookstore in the township (a
bikeride away), but only to buy school supplies etc.

**Feedback from teachers**\
 The principal, when asked about the success, said “Although having a
library in itself is already a big success, when it comes to promoting
the use, we are still in the very beginning phases.” They didn’t have a
place large enough for all the students to enter, and he was also very
worried about control, and books disappearing. Several of the teachers
did borrow books on teaching methods, and they would like more books on
this topic.

One young teacher was reading “Optimistic teaching”, and said it helped
her whenever she was depressed in her teaching. She also said that in
total she read a lot more, now that they had the library, because there
was often a lot of “downtime” during the day, and she always kept a book
in her drawer ready to be read. They also said they would like more
“tool books” (gongjushu), like dictionaries, encyclopaedias etc.
However, given the procedure for using the library right now, that
doesn’t seem very helpful (one would have to “check out” a dictionary
for two weeks to look something up).

One young Chinese teacher said the library was great. He used to read a
bit every day for his fifth grade students from a novel that he loved,
and he said he couldn’t have done that if the library wasn’t there to
provide the book (I later observed him reading in class from this book).
He also underlined that more books were needed, because students got
frustrated when the books they wanted to borrow were not available. He
said he often tested his students orally on the books they had borrowed
to see if they had actually read them. He also suggested having a quite
corner reserved for reading somewhere, for those students who wanted to
read during breaks etc, because the classroom often got very messy and
loud (which I also observed).

The young teacher, who is now responsible for the lending to students,
said that having the students enter the library would be impossible,
they were far too wild, and would drag apart books that two students
both wanted to borrow, etc. The sixth grade was the worst, the younger
students might be a bit better behaved, she said.

**Procedure for villagers**\
 The villagers are usually introduced to the library by the 12-15
members of the reading committee who tell their friends and neighbours
etc about it. They have one copy of the book list, and stated that they
often introduced appropriate books to people depending on what they
worked with, for example books on growing vegetables, books on raising
animals, or on fixing machines (because of the used machines market).
The reading comittee then goes to the library to get the book for the
villager (as far as I understand, they have a key to the library, but
not to the school gates. maybe the old man living in the school can open
in the evening).

The reading committee never mentioned this, but the young teacher told
me that some villagers that had already “understood the system” would
come to find her directly at the school to borrow books. The same with
some middle school students that didn’t have a library at their school.
However, this was difficult, because the school gates are locked during
school hours, and the young teacher is often busy teaching, etc.

The villagers pay a deposit for the books according to the price of the
book rounded up to the nearest whole yuan. This is returned to them, if
they return the book in a good condition.

**Reactions from the reading committee**\
 When asked if they didn’t think it was a lot of bother (mafan) to have
to go get the books for the villagers, they said they didn’t mind (bu pa
mafan), and that they were especially inspired by the RCEF volunteers
that had been there in the summer - if these young people can work so
hard for free, then we old people should make a contribution as well.
They said that both young and old people borrowed books, but a bit more
men than women. They would like more books about machines (including how
to repair them), raising animals and growing crops, how to live healthy,
cooking - what different dishes go together, etc.

One member suggested that they take some relevant books with them when
they go around to the villagers, and that in this way, the villagers
would be more easily enticed to borrow books. They also wanted to hold
more “mass meetings” to promote the library. They are quite happy with
the general procedures for the library, said that the RCEF volunteers
put down so much “blood and sweat” to write them, so that we shouldn’t
change them easily.

**Statistics**\
 So far only one book has been lost, and the price was compensated by
the student’s family. The library has been open for about 1,5 months
(opened 2,5 months ago, but was not operational for one month because of
sickness in the family of a key person). So far, roughly 160 books have
been borrowed by students (and teachers). Although there are 200
students (including kindergarten) at the school, the teachers said that
the lowest grades never borrowed books, and that the “borrowing public”
might be around 140 students, which indicated a bit over one borrowed
book per student in 1,5 months. When I talked informally with students,
fourth grade students indicated that they had borrowed 1-2 books each,
and sixth graders that they had borrowed 3-4 books each. Not sure how
accurate these numbers are. Among the villagers, about 40 books had been
borrowed, which is of course very little. In total, the library has
around 530 titles.

**Specific suggestions for the library in Site 1**

**For the school children**

-   More books - all the teachers, students, and villagers mentioned
  this. I am guessing that this would be especially relevant to the
  children’s books, since if every student borrowed one book, that
  would remove half of the library books from the shelves. If only
  part of the collection is appropriate for children, and some books
  are more popular than others, it seems like this would often lead to
  popular books being unavailable. I would have to study the current
  collections much more in-depth to ascertain what kind of adult books
  should be added, although there seems to be a great interest among
  the teachers for teaching/pedagogics related books, which might be a
  great place to start. The suggestion about books like dictionaries
  and encyclopaedias would only be useful if the library was able to
  be kept open regularly for students to access books.
-   Although there is a lot of resistance from teachers to keeping the
  library open to students, this idea should still not be completely
  abandoned. Being able to access the library would both promote
  reading interest (it is much easier to get enticed by a physical
  book, than a printed out list), but also be a pre-requisite for
  actively using the library as part of the teaching and learning. The
  current location is clearly very small, and I am not sure if a
  larger location can be found. An alternative would be to only let in
  a certain number of students at a time. Alternatively to take out a
  number of books at a time to show to a class - either for reading in
  class, or for borrowing. For example, it is likely that also the
  younger students would be interested in picture books etc, but might
  not be able to choose from a list. If a teacher went into the
  library and picked out a number of simple books with big pictures
  etc, and brought these to the class and let the students spend an
  hour doing silent reading, I think even first graders and
  kindergarten students would be able to benefit from this. Many of
  the things I will write about improving the experience with the open
  library at Site 2 would be relevant to a possible future open
  library at Site 1 as well.
-   All the students mentioned that they would love to read magazines,
  and that they had no access to them currently. I wonder if either
  the library could subscribe to some youth magazines (perhaps we
  could be sponsored by the magazines?) if the library is open (this
  applies to Site 2 as well), or if the library is closed, if each
  class (nianji) could subscribe to one age-relevant magazine that
  could stay in the classroom to be read by students between classes,
  etc. (The old issues could then be cut up and provide material for
  posters and projects etc).

**Reaching the villagers better**

-   In general, lending to the villagers is still at a very early stage,
  and this is clearly the area that needs the most thought in Site 1.
  In a way, what RCEF is doing here is moving from trying to improve
  primary education - a very narrow and well-defined topic - to the
  much tricker task of “village development”. In order to do this
  well, one would have to understand the social relations in the
  village to a much deeper extent than what I was able to during my
  short stay. However I have a number of suggestions.
-   The library might be promoted during communication to the parents
  from the school, and especially during parent-teacher meetings
  (jiazhanghui).
-   It seems like it might absolutely be worth experimenting with adding
  some DVDs/VCDs to the collection, given that almost all villagers
  have access to DVD player and a television. Many of them are very
  interested in learning more about farming, taking care of their
  families etc, but might not be comfortable enough reading long
  books. There are different considerations here - would the
  availability of DVDs and VCDs entice more villagers to use the
  library at all - and thus perhaps in the future also borrow more
  books? Is it an important priority for RCEF to improve the reading
  skills also of older villagers, and in this case, would DVDs or VCDs
  hinder this? Some DVDs might also be used by the teachers, but so
  far, the big television is hidden in the teacher’s lounge and does
  not seem to get almost any use.
-   Currently the villagers are charged a deposit equivalent roughly to
  the cost of each book. Although the reading committee insisted that
  this was never a problem for villagers, I still have my doubts,
  since everything that makes borrowing more difficult will reduce the
  amount of borrowings. I wonder if the deposit is really necessary,
  and if it is, perhaps it would be possible to set a fixed, low
  amount, for example 5 or 10 yuan, rather than a varying and uneven
  amount (like 24,50).

I think availability of the books is a huge problem - currently the
books are only available either through the reading committee, which
shows a list of titles and then fetch the book that is needed, or
through villagers directly finding te young teacher at the school, here
are some suggestions to either improve these methods, or add new
methods:

-   It seems like the reading committee, although very committed, only
  reach a specific subset of the population. This subset is certainly
  limited by age (quite old) and gender (male), and possibly only to
  their friends (I don’t understand the social relationships well
  enough to tell). A possibility would be to either extend the reading
  committee, or to create separate committees. One possible venue to
  reach women would be the informal dance groups that exist - perhaps
  we could work with them to not only distribute books (through the
  book list), but ideally also form reading groups that meet and
  discuss the books they read, etc. Even though literacy might be
  lower among women, I believe that some books, like recipes, books on
  child health etc, would still find a ready audience - and perhaps
  starting from this, they could work themselves up to novels, etc. I
  was wondering if we could also work through some of the female
  teachers at the primary school, although they are all quite young,
  and I am not sure how well connected they are.
-   Another group is the younger people. I was wondering whether we
  could for example induce the university students to take a leading
  role here - possibly against some kind of symbolic reward or
  “honor”, however I am not sure how much time they spend in the
  village (but even if they are just there during the summer months,
  this option would still be worth exploring). The same applies to the
  high school students. I don’t know how many young men and women live
  in the village, or if they have mostly left to find work, but they
  would also constitute and important group.
-   Although the teachers are strongly opposed to opening the library
  for children, I would propose that the library be opened for access
  by the villagers during for example one or several nights each week.
  There are unlikely to be many of them coming at once, and so the
  small space available would not be a large problem. The only thing
  needed would be someone volunteering to keep it open, and record
  borrowings, which if rotated among the reading committee should not
  be an insurmountable burden. This would enable villagers to directly
  browse for books, and immediately check out interesting material.
-   One of the members of the village committee suggested that they
  bring some of the books with them around in the village to show to
  the villagers. This is not a bad idea, and to take that a bit
  further, one thing that would probably increase the access of the
  library enormously is some kind of a library-bicycle. I am thinking
  of a three-wheel bicycle with a luggage rack, of the kind that
  already exists in the village, with the capacity to carry
  50-hundreds of books in display format. In this way, a good
  selection of the library’s adult material could be put on the bike,
  and taken around to the different locations in the village where
  people congegrate, for example in the machine-part market, or
  outside some of the shops. Villagers would be able to immediately
  borrow the books they liked (or return books they had finished).
  It’s quite possible that the necessary material already exists in
  the village, and the investment would be minimal - what is needed is
  someone who is enthusiastic about taking on the role as an ambulant
  librarian. This method is frequently used in Indonesia.
-   In Indonesia, much of the idea behind people’s libraries (reading
  gardens, as they are called) is to make it as informal, and easy to
  access as possible. Usually the libraries are housed in someone’s
  house, or, when it expands, in a small structure in someone’s
  backyard, etc. This idea might not fit at all with a Chinese
  village, but I still wanted to mention it: What about housing the
  adult part of the library collection (minus the books on pedagogy
  and teaching) in for example the head of the village’s house? He or
  his wife seemed to almost always be around, and many of the other
  villagers seemed very comfortable about dropping in, leafing through
  the reading material that his house is already full of, etc. I
  didn’t discuss this with him, so I don’t know even if he would be
  willing to do this, and there might be all kinds of problems that I
  cannot foresee - whether other villagers would be “jealous”, or
  whether only his friends would use it, and not those who didn’t like
  him, etc. But unless the library in the school radically expands
  access to villagers, the primary way for villagers to access books
  would still be through the reading committee - whether through the
  list of titles, or in a possible future, through an ambulatory
  book-bicycle etc. In these cases, the storage location might be
  arbitrary, but storing it with the head of the village, or someone
  else in the reading committee, would make it much easier to access
  for them. Certainly, it would not be hard to find space for the 200+
  books in question.

As far as I understand, the different middle schools (chuzhong) near the
primary school do not have their own libraries. As seen above, a few
middle school students who know about the library come directly to look
for the young teacher, and borrow books. Perhaps in the future, this
could be expanded, either by giving them a list of book titles, having
them order the books they want, and then having a teacher, or student
volunteers etc, fetch the books from the primary school library. Or, by
using the “library-bicycle” to provide access to library books on a/some
set day(s) a week. In both cases, this would probably be contingent on
adding more books to the library, and RCEF would have to decide whether
it would be a better idea to contribute to libraries directly in the
middle schools themselves, and whether they should keep their focus on
the primary school. It is natural (and realistic) to believe that
primary school students who have had positive experiences with borrowing
books during their years at the primary school will be looking for
access to more books when they reach middle school, and it would be sad
if they did not have access. In fact, a generalized service with an
ambulatory library bicycle in the village, would also potentially reach
the middle school and high school students who reside there, so it
doesn’t have to happen through the schools.

I will provide ideas for integrating the library into teaching and
learning, and how to manage an open library, after a description of the
situation at Site 2. Most of this is or can be relevant to Site 1 as
well.\
 ****

**\
 Report from Site 2**

**Brief introduction**\
 As I stated above, I will not describe the village and the school in as
much detail as above, because there are people in RCEF who understand
this much better than me. Suffice to say that the village itself is a
lot smaller than Site 1, and is also quite a bit further removed from
the closest township (still in bicycling range). There is also no
regular public transport to this village. The primary school was
originally a publicly run school, that was closed down because of low
student numbers, and taken over by a local couple who have turned it
into a non-profit (minban) dormitory primary school. Many of the kids,
who stay at the school for 12 days, and then go home for two days, are
the children of migrant workers, and stay with their grandparents.

Because the school is not run by the government, it has a bit more
wiggle-room in experimenting, but they are still tied to a lot of
regulations, and it would be more correct to call it a Chinese primary
school that is committed to excellence, teacher development, and a
slightly more rounded view of development, rather than a full-blown
experimental school with an alternative pedagogics. The classes I
attended at Site 2 were very similar to the ones I attended in Site 1,
but the teachers were often trying to push the envelope a little bit,
and involve the students more. In addition, because it is a dormitory
school, there is a much larger space for activities outside of class
that can contribute to the children’s development. A great example is
the fields behind the school, where different grades grow vegetables,
and where the kids run enthusiastically every day after class to water
“their” plants - this is a great way of connecting the children to their
agricultural heritage, and also provides a potential plethora of
opportunities for integrating real life into teaching about for example
the environment, plants, etc.

Two volunteers from RCEF have been living on and off in the village
since October, and the school currently has one long-time teaching
fellow who teaches English. The school is also connected to a primary
school in the US, who has provided pen pals for one grade, and there
were also pictures of a school class from that school in the library,
etc.

**The library**\
 ![](http://reganmian.net/blog/files/reading-from-back.jpg)The library
is in a room the size of a classroom, with shelves lining all the walls,
and a large table in the middle of the room, with a few benches. The
books are organized by groups and displayed around the room - there
seems to still be a lot of space for more books (partly because a lot of
the books were in circulation when I arrived). There is also a computer
in the library, with an internet connection, as well as a number of
masks for disguises, and some sports equipment that the students get
access to by asking a teacher. As far as I understood, the students are
able to use the library once a week, during which time they enter the
library and spend time reading books in the library, as well as check
out books to bring with them. The books to be borrowed are noted on
individual index cards for each student.

**Statistics**\
 ![](http://reganmian.net/blog/files/library-cards.jpg)It is much harder
to provide statistics on the use of this library for two different
reasons. First of all, because it is a partly-open library, many books
are read during “opening hours”, and not officially registered as
checked out. In addition, the way registration of borrowings happen
makes it very difficult to quickly estimate borrowings. It also makes it
hard to find out who has borrowed a specific book. However, the library
seemed very well liked - students were enthusiastically reading books
during their visits in the library, and during some of the “quiet” hours
during the day, when students have to self-study, I saw many reading
intently in their library books (including some of the youngest
students, which is an interesting contrast to Site 1).

**Suggestions**

**Improving the library environment, and access hours**

-   Site 2 has already begun well, by finding a well-sized room for the
  library, and allowing students direct access. That this is
  successful is clear from the enthusiasm of the children. However, I
  believe that the real potential of the library has not yet been
  realized. Right now, the students are only able to access the
  library one or a few times a week.  Because the school is a
  dormitory school, students - in contrast with the students at Site 1
  - spend all their day at the school, and have lot’s of free play
  time, where individual students could potentially visit the library.
  Barriers to more general “opening hours” are both the need for
  supervision, and the fact that the library, when I was at the
  school, was frequently used as an “office” by RCEF volunteers, a
  place to hold teacher meetings etc.
-   As for the fact that the library is being used as an “office”, is a
  result of the lack of space at the school. Hopefully this will be
  partly remediated by for example the new wooden buildings that will
  arrive. To a certain extent though, if individual teachers wanted to
  use the library to study, this wouldn’t be an obstacle to opening it
  to the kids - but when RCEF volunteers use laptops, with cables
  stretched across the room, etc, combining it with library services
  becomes problematic.
-   Supervision is also a difficult problem. Perhaps the situation will
  be easier next year, with the addition of more teachers, and some
  library service can be assigned to each teacher - during which he or
  she can also be correcting papers, preparing for class etc. I wonder
  if it would actually be possible to use students to supervise the
  room - perhaps selecting among the oldest ones. This would depend on
  turning the library into a calm reading and studying environment,
  which is the next point.
-   Currently, some of the students entering the library still act in a
  “wild way”, chasing each others and shouting, etc. This is not
  improved by the fact that there are masks for disguises, and sports
  equipment also stored in the room. I believe that successfully
  extending access to the library would depend on turning it into a
  place with different rules, and a different atmosphere, than the
  rest of the school - and instilling into the students the rules of
  behaviour in a library. The library should be a calm and peaceful
  oasis, where students can retreat from the wild games and shouts of
  outside (which are wonderful expressions of youthful enthusiasm, but
  not appropriate in a library). When one enters the library, one
  should automatically speak with a lower voice, and calm down.
  Running around and shouting will not be tolerated. Perhaps the
  interior of the library can also support this atmosphere, for
  example one could experiment with playing low classical music, etc.
  I don’t know if this is too idealistic, but if the students were
  really trained well in how to behave in a library, it is possible
  that students could eventually supervise the opening of the library,
  making sure that students behave, and that all books taken out are
  registered as borrowed. This would mean that students could go to
  the library during their breaks, their self-study sessions, or in
  the evenings, and study on site. This is also a prerequisite for
  many of the ways of integrating the library into teaching and
  learning, which I will discuss next.

**Integrating the library into teaching and learning**

-   ![](http://reganmian.net/blog/files/map.jpg)In addition to simply
  promoting pleasure reading - which by itself has a hugely positive
  effect on literacy skills and school learning outcomes, it would be
  very beneficial to tie use of the library into the curriculum. I
  have already seen teachers send their students out to find certain
  countries on the world map pasted on the exterior wall. In the same
  way, we can imagine sending students to the library to look up
  something, especially in a reference book (gongjushu), such as a
  dictionary, encyclopaedia etc - which now become really useful tools
  for the students. If this happened during class time, the teacher
  could open the library and bring the students in, even if it it
  usually closed.
-   To extend this, one of the most characteristic features of Western
  education is project-based work, and in this, a library is
  essential. From what I understand, this has yet not been tried, but
  with an open library a teacher could give a group of students (or
  individual students) the task of gathering information about a
  topic, for example a certain foreign country, a profession, an
  animal, etc. They then have to go to the library in their spare time
  (when it is generally open - see above), find the resources needed,
  and write up their findings. I think this kind of taks would be very
  appropriate for at least the 4th-6th graders, and would teach them
  to work independently, to search for information themselves, to
  summarize and choose the most important points, to organize their
  thoughts logically, etc. It also teaches them to regard the library
  as a place where we go when we are looking about information, and
  will be a useful preparation whether they will go on to be
  university students, or farmers who one day will need information
  about a certain disease, or a certain kind of fodder. If material is
  available, the results of the students tasks could also be presented
  on posters, that could be posted both in the classroom, but also in
  public areas, so that other students could read about it. Or even
  written on the blackboards. For example, currently, one group could
  research about earthquakes, another one about Sichuan geography, big
  disasters in history, etc.
-   When it comes to Chinese class (yuwen) and perhaps to a much smaller
  degree English class for the most advanced students, many of the
  suggestions I make in the section on increasing reading interest can
  also be applied.

**\
 Increasing reading interest/use of the library**

-   I would suggest that with increasing reading interest, we set two
  different goals. The first is to get the students who are not very
  enthusiastic about reading more interested in the library, and the
  other is to push students towards more advanced reading materials. I
  noted that in some of the higher classes, some students would be
  reading proper novels (for children), whereas others would still be
  leafing through picture books meant for first and second grade. This
  isn’t necessarily only linked to reading capabilities, but also in
  “laziness”, and I believe that these students need to be
  “challenged” in a positive sense to “stretch further”. Here are some
  ideas.
-   Have students write short book reviews about the books that they
  like the best, and post them on a board for the other students to
  see. (Teachers and others can also contribute to this, of course).
  Variation: Choose one each month, as the most well-written, or the
  most enthusiastic, and have a small prize, or recognition.
-   Have some kind of a price for number of books read, for example a
  bronze (or white jade, etc) for five books, silver for 10 and gold
  for 15 books. The students would have to write a tiny book review
  for each (enough for us to know that they’ve read it, but not so
  much that it feels like a burden). We should also have some
  limitation on the kind of books - for the early grades, any books
  can be OK, but for the higher grades, there should be a minimum
  amount of pages for example, to avoid them reading five picture
  books. We could also tie this to the Olympics, having a “reading
  Olympics”. The people who win can be written on a list
  (blackboard?), get a recognition (diploma), and even be awarded
  during an “Olympic prize ceremony”.
-   Having a “reading day” or “book day” every year, where all the
  different activities are tied to books, reading, and libraries.

**General ideas around literacy and creativity**

-   In addition to promoting use of the library, we should promote
  literacy, writing, and creativity in all forms and shapes.
-   We could have a story writing competition, where all students were
  welcome to submit stories around a certain topic. The prizes could
  be divided by grades, the best stories could be posted around the
  school (and also on RCEF’s web page, etc). (They could also exchange
  stories with the American school - we send you our best three
  stories, and you send us your best three stories. This would need
  translation. For example, for Site 2 students: Based on everything
  you know, write about a day in an American students life).
-   How much does custom publishing of books cost in China? What if all
  the students contributed poems, short stories, reports from field
  trips and drawings to a book, that was printed, and distributed to
  the other RCEF sites?
-   In fact, the RCEF teaching fellow who teaches English also gave me
  an idea. What if all the students contributed in making an English
  textbook - designed around the lives of children in Chinese
  villages, with texts about farming, studying, parents going to apply
  for jobs in Beijing, etc. with all the illustrations done by
  different students - there is no lack of talent!). This could be a
  wonderful learning opportunity and challenge for the older students.

**Conclusion**

Although the library program is very young, and it was implemented
without much preparation, I believe that it is already quite successful
in reaching primary school students. There are many possibilities of
increasing the use and utility of the libraries, and I hope that some of
my suggestions can be useful. As for the ambition to reach villagers in
addition to primary school students, in Site 1, is very ambitious, and
has not been as succesful as the program for primary school students. I
provided a number of suggestions for how this can be improved, but these
should be reviewed by someone who understands well the social dynamics
in the village.

It will be very interesting to follow these two programs in the future,
and it would also be good to find out about what models the other
library sites employ, and see what we can learn from them. A possible
task for the research team would be to look into what kind of success
indicators, and ways of evaluation, that other library programs - even
public and school library programs in developed countries  - use, and
whether we could adopt any of these in measuring the success of RCEF
libraries. I would like to thank RCEF for giving me this opportunity to
get a first glimpse at RCEF programs, and I hope to be involved in
different ways in this discussion in the future.
