---
title: Adopted musician, Sweden, and two kinds of open access
created_at: 2008-11-19 00:00:00 -0500
kind: article
tags: canada, europe, media, movies
---

![](http://svt.se/content/2/c6/06/48/21/lennartzlogga.jpg)

I spent a year studying in Sweden, and really enjoyed getting to know
better our neighbour, that Norwegians always make fun of (they tell us
the same jokes back, with Norwegians in the stupid roles, so it works
both ways). I love the Swedish language, and often read Swedish novels,
or download audiobooks (my latest experience was something like a total
of 60 hours for the [Stieg Larsson
trilogy](http://www.stieglarsson.com/)).

Norway and Sweden are similar in many ways, and we both have our public
broadcasters, which show generally high quality shows with no
advertising. They have also been experimenting with the web, perhaps
inspired by BBC, and both the Norwegian [NRK](http://nrk.no) and the
Swedish [SVT](http://svt.se) (as well as the Danish [DR](http://dr.dk))
have began streaming their video, and producing podcasts and vodcasts.
This latter is important for me, because living in Canada, it has
generally been impossible to watch high-quality streaming video. NRK
produces some *great* shows, that I would love to watch, but alas it is
almost impossible.

Imagine how impressed I became when I checked out SVT’s website and saw
something called “[Play Prima](http://media.svt.se/play/playprima/)“. At
first, because of the title, I thought this was a system where you had
to pay to access the material (this is common for Norway’s commercial
channel, which uses payment by cellphone. Note that I would happily pay
if I was able to watch content in high quality in Canada, but it’s only
for streaming). In fact, Play Prima turned out to be comepletely free
(and no sign-up, thank you) and offer very high quality streaming video
of many of their TV series.

This is offered through a commercial provider ([Move
Networks](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Move_Networks)), which has come
up with a new way of streaming that is able to downshift and upshift
quality very rapidly, and I am guessing they also have a global network
of mirrors, something similar to Akamai. This is probably costing SVT a
fair penny - then again, they have a mandate to provide quality
programming to the Swedes, and since Sweden is one of the most wired
countries in the world, it makes sense that the TV station has to
follow. The advantage of the Nordics is also that their own programming
is not in English, and therefore they don’t face the problem that BBC
faces in justifying why the British public should pay tax money for the
BBC providing great programming to the entire world (therefore, there is
luckily no geo-ip blocking in place either).

All that background story to say that I clicked on a TV show randomly,
and ended up watching a delightful three hour miniseries on an adopted
African-Swedish boy whose biggest dream was to sign in a
“[Dansband](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dansband)“, a group playing a
particularly Swedish kind of very “danceable” music. This music is seen
as “very white”, “very Swedish”, and the biggest audience is older
people in small towns - thus, traditionally conservative. The show
follows Lennart during his travails, until he finally puts together his
own group, and after much ridicule and prejudice is able to reach his
goal. Not only were the series very well made, but they also included
[Fares Fares](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fares_Fares), a
Syrian-Swedish who is one of my favorite Swedish actors, who has starred
in several Swedish blockbusters.

After watching the series last night, I felt the need to read some of
people’s and media’s reactions to it, and I googled around for a while.
I chanced upon a thesis on the portrayal of adopted children in Swedish
media, using this series as a case study, which luckily I was able to
download from the [Malmö University institutional
repository](http://dspace.mah.se/dspace/handle/2043/6177). One of the
points made by the thesis was that Lennart, as an adopted African, was
culturally entirely Swedish - he grew up in a small town where everyone
knew him, he spoke Swedish with a dialect, loved Swedish music, and felt
uncomfortable in the “immigrant quarters” in Stockholm. Yet, everyone
kept treating him as an immigrant with a different cultural heritage,
and finally, although the ending could be seen as happy, he could only
find success through a “dansband” made up almost entirely of immigrants…
He could only be accepted as an immigrant, not as a native Swede.

I thought this was a very interesting point, and I was glad to have read
the thesis to provide me with some perspective on the film. Turns out
the author of the thesis was himself internationally adopted from Korea,
who has later written about [his own
experience](http://webzone.k3.mah.se/projects/kjmag/viewarticle.aspx?articleID=52&issueID=15)
(in Swedish).

In the end I had two thoughts. The first was that I really appreciated
the fact that I had, from Canada, gained a little insight into the
national discourse on immigration, adoptees and racism that happens
within Sweden - through two different kinds of open access. The first,
making the TV series available online (apparently it was also viewed by
1,3 million people when shown on TV, out of a population of 9 million).
And the second, Patrik making his thesis available in the institutional
repository.

And I also wondered when I would see something similar from Canada.
Hopefully racism is not as rampant here, but there are certainly enough
issues of ethnicity to grab on to. [The Little Mosque on the
Prairie](http://www.cbc.ca/littlemosque/) was quite good, and the book
[Banana Boys](http://www.bananaboys.com/) and the [play based on the
book](http://fu-gen.org/20082009-season/), which I recently saw, were
great. But there are *many* stories yet to be told!

Stian

[![Reblog this post [with
Zemanta]](http://img.zemanta.com/reblog_e.png?x-id=d64188fb-ac88-4aab-a8e5-ec257d9469b3)](http://reblog.zemanta.com/zemified/d64188fb-ac88-4aab-a8e5-ec257d9469b3/ "Zemified by Zemanta")
