---
title: PhotoDropper - making blogging with CC pictures painless
created_at: Tue, 26 Feb 2008 00:53:00 +0000
kind: article
tags: []
---

[![](http://farm3.static.flickr.com/2154/2292346266_6e36b36bbb_m.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/38729188@N00/2292346266/)This
is something I have really been waiting for! PhotoDropper is a plugin
for WordPress that enables you to seemlessly search for CC licensed
pictures in Flickr and other databases, and with a click insert the
picture into your blog, complete with the photo credit. I have always
found it a pain to have to click multiple times to copy the picture URL,
the name, the link URL etc.

It can still be improved - I’d like to be able to specify that it
gathers all credits at the bottom of the post, and I’d love to be able
to specify how they are formatted, but this is small potatoes. This is a
wonderful tool, that also shows some of the possibilities with media
licensed under CC.

A few things I’d like to see: a similar plugin for OpenOffice Impress
(or KPresenter) which let’s you easily insert pictures with open
licenses, and collects all the sources at the last slide. I sometimes
make slides with 60 photos, and it’s a huge pain to manage it manually,
sometimes I am not able to release it publicly because of this,
sometimes I do release it and feel bad… It would also be neat if people
were able to specify how they would want to be accredited (does the
photographer of this photo want to be acknowledged as ronnie44052?) -
ideally this should be part of the embedded licensing info in each
picture/mp3/Word document/pdf. (For academic pdfs, they should also
embed all information necessary to produce academic bibliographies).

One thing at a time i guess
![:)](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_smile.gif)\
 Stian

[![Creative Commons
License](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/plugins/photo_dropper/images/cc.png)](http://www.photodropper.com/creative-commons/ "creative commons")[photo](http://www.photodropper.com/photos/)
credit:
[ronnie44052](http://www.flickr.com/photos/38729188@N00/2292346266/ "ronnie44052")
