---
title: Peer2Peer University - week one
created_at: Mon, 27 Oct 2008 06:53:00 +0000
kind: article
tags: []
---

![](http://www.google.com/a/cpanel/peer2peeruniversity.org/images/logo.gif?service=jotspot)

After two years of discussions, that for my part began at
[iSummit](http://icommonssummit.org/) in Dubrovnik in 2007, we finally
decided to put our thoughts into action. We were featured in [an article
in the Chronicle of Higher
Education](http://chronicle.com/free/v55/i09/09a01201.htm) on Monday,
which even included [a video of
Philipp](http://chronicle.com/media/video/v55/i09/peer/) talking about
the idea. Philipp [blogged about the
project](http://bokaap.net/open-edu/peer-2-peer-univerity-p2pu-website-up/)
on Monday, and I was planning to post on the same day, but it never
happened. The advantage is that I can now do a small round-up of what
has been said and written about the Peer2Peer University in this last
week. I used [Diigo](http://www.diigo.com) to tag links I came across
that mentioned P2PU, and it let me generate the following list very
easily.

You can read much more about the project on our [current
homepage](http://peer2peeruniversity.org), and sign up for our
[p2pu-announce](http://groups.google.com/group/p2pu-announce) mailing
list for very infrequent updates, or the
[p2pu-discuss](http://groups.google.com/group/p2pu-discuss) mailing list
to discuss the ideas and the development of the project. We have had
wonderful responses and feedback during the first week since we “went
public”, with numerous people emailing us and offering to be
“sense-makers”, tutors, advisors and volunteers. We also really
appreciate the thoughtful comments on blogs and otherwise, and I hope to
engage more with the ideas that have been put forward, later.

From the current webpage:

*The Peer 2 Peer University is an online community of open study groups
for short university-level courses. Think of it as online book clubs for
open educational resources. The P2PU helps you navigate the wealth of
open education materials that are out there, creates small groups of
motivated learners, and supports the design and facilitation of courses.
Students and tutors get recognition for their work, and we are building
pathways to formal credit as well.*

*Find out more about what [P2PU
courses](http://www.peer2peeruniversity.org/courses) look like, and
consider [creating your
own](http://www.peer2peeruniversity.org/courses/create-a-course).*

**Some of the links that mention Peer2Peer University:**

The University of Western Ontario newspaper wrote about us

-   [UWO Gazette interview with Stian about
  P2PU](http://www.gazette.uwo.ca/pdf/Gazette-2008-10-24.pdf)

Open Education News both wrote about us, and about George Siemens’
reaction

-   [Reaction to the P2P University Initaitive « Open Education
  News](http://openeducationnews.org/2008/10/22/reaction-to-the-p2p-university-initaitive)

-   [Open Education Leading Enthusiasts to Start P2P University « Open
  Education
  News](http://openeducationnews.org/2008/10/22/open-education-leading-enthusiasts-to-start-p2p-university)

[We had two mentions in German:\
](http://www.diigo.com/cloud/houshuang)[](http://www.diigo.com/user/houshuang/p2pu)

-   [hardbloggingscientists.de » P2PU: Erste Peer-to-Peer Universität
  gestartet](http://www.hardbloggingscientists.de/lehrstuck/p2pu-erste-peer-to-peer-universitat-gestartet)

-   [gulli: P2PU: Peer-to-Peer Technologie soll virtuelle Lerngruppen
  ermöglichen](http://www.gulli.com/news/p2pu-peer-to-peer-technologie-2008-10-22)

And one in French:

-   [VIPeers in French: Apprenez, Partagez, Analysez à la “P2P
  University”](http://blog.vipeers.com/vipeersfr/2008/10/apprenez-partag.html)

And we were even “slashdotted”

-   [Slashdot - New ‘Peer-to-Peer University’ Offers Free
  Teaching](http://slashdot.org/firehose.pl?op=view&id=1315515&from=rss)

I started a discussion about the project on Global Swadeshi

-   [Peer2Peer University - Global
  Swadeshi](http://www.globalswadeshi.net/forum/topic/show?id=2097821%3ATopic%3A5004)

George Siemens’ challenges us to be more peer-to-peer based, and Mark
Oehlert agrees

-   [elearnspace: Peer 2 Peer
  University](http://www.elearnspace.org/blog/archives/003563.html)

-   [e-Clippings (Learning As Art): George Siemens Talks Dirty…and I
  agree with
  him…](http://blogoehlert.typepad.com/eclippings/2008/10/george-siemens.html)

We’re mentioned on about.com

-   [Peer 2 Peer University - Soon to
  Launch](http://distancelearn.about.com/b/2008/10/21/peer-2-peer-university-soon-to-launch.htm)

First tweet about p2pu?

-   [Twitter / Mike Caulfield: @acarvin You might find th
  …](http://twitter.com/holden/statuses/967633929)

Brief mention on Miriam Jones’ blog, with some great pictures of how an
Open University could look…

-   [At the height « Living in interesting
  times](http://livingininterestingtimes.wordpress.com/2008/10/20/at-the-height)

Writing about the view of brick and mortar universities, whether they
would allow their professors to participate, or even fight the effort
like the record companies are fighting P2P

-   [Center for College Affordability and Productivity: Open Source
  Education](http://collegeaffordability.blogspot.com/2008/10/open-source-education.html)

Sharon questions who the volunteers who will teach are, and how
sustainable the project will be

-   [Cerulean’s Soapbox: Volunteer
  Teachers](http://ceruleanssoapbox.blogspot.com/2008/10/volunteer-teachers.html)

Ali Zaid Alsagoff is excited about the P2PU.

-   [ZaidLearn: The Peer 2 Peer University
  (P2PU)](http://zaidlearn.blogspot.com/2008/10/peer-2-peer-university-p2pu.html)

Some thoughts on the P2PU presentation at Open Ed ‘08 at USU

-   [My Impressions on “What Web 2.0 can Teach the Open Education
  Movement” | ITLS @
  USU](http://itls.usu.edu/blogs/mark-grammer/2008/sep/29/my-impressions-what-web-20-can-teach-open-education-movement)

Photo of three of the p2pu core group in Dubrovnik ‘07

-   [peer 2 peer university peeroneers on Flickr - Photo
  Sharing!](http://www.flickr.com/photos/iphilipp/601655056/in/photostream)

Philipp Schmidt introduces the project on his blog

-   [Sharing Nicely » Peer 2 Peer Univerity (P2PU) website
  up](http://bokaap.net/open-edu/peer-2-peer-univerity-p2pu-website-up)

Mike Caulfield introduces the project (p2pU) on the OCW blog.

-   [Peer-to-Peer University (P2PU) to Launch in Early 2009 at OCW
  Blog](http://ocwblog.org/2008/10/20/peer-to-peer-university-p2pu-to-launch-in-early-2009)

Stian
