---
title: OpenLibrary and Universal Library, guys work together!
created_at: Sun, 03 Aug 2008 15:23:00 +0000
kind: article
tags:
  - books
  - china
  - India
  - languages
  - libraries
---

![](http://openlibrary.org/static/logos/logo-en.png)**The OpenLibrary\
**I wrote about the OpenLibrary
[previously](http://reganmian.net/blog/2008/04/02/google-books-step-aside-openlibrary-makes-reading-fun/),
and since then they have only gotten better. They have added a lot of
books, but more importantly, their [website](http://www.openlibrary.org)
has turned into a real portal, where you can access all of their scanned
books (over 234,000). This is only part of their quest, which is also to
provide open information about all the books ever published in the
world, through an innovative new
[database/wiki](http://openlibrary.org/about/tech) that they have
developed. However, it is still very easy to type in a search string,
and ask for only scanned books to be returned. They are then viewable in
the flip-book format, which is still the absolutely best interface to
scanned books that I have ever seen on the web. It makes reading online
quite enjoyable (especially for old, beautifully decorated books), and
the only thing missing is a zoom feature, which they have stated is
coming.

**Universal Library**\
 At a conference in Shanghai, I was introduced to the amazing [Universal
Library project](http://www.ulib.org/), which I cannot believe I had not
heard of earlier. Run by Carnegie Mellon University, in collaboration
with Chinese and Indian governments, they have already scanned some 1,5
million books. What is exciting is not just the sheer numbers, but the
incredible linguistic variety. Over one million books available in
Chinese, and thousands in Urdu, Hindi, Arabic, Telugu, Tamil and many
others. They have book scanning centers around the world, and have
apparently developed some very advanced new technology, both for book
scanning, for OCR in different scripts, etc.

![](http://www.ulib.org/ULIBImages/ULIBsmall.gif)**Technical issues**\
 Given all this, I was extremely enthusiastic to try out the project.
However, it turns out that all their files are either stores as DjVu
(mostly the Chinese contributions) or tiff files (everything else). Both
of these require special viewers to be installed, and after spending a
lot of time trying to follow different instructions and downloading
different files, I was finally able to display the Chinese books in
Firefox on my MacBook, but I have still not been able to view the tiff
files. And even if I am able to display the Chinese pages, the solution
is still very far from as user-friendly and appealing as the OpenLibrary
flip-book solution.

It does say on the Universal Library site that they will eventually also
make their books available as PDFs etc, but my immediate thought would
be, why don’t they publish it through the OpenLibrary? They already have
the infrastructure and the technical solution. Indeed I don’t know the
different reasons that lead to this not being an integrated part of the
OpenContent Alliance in the first place, but if it was possible to
integrate all these sources into the OpenLibrary - which is already
aiming to be a truly international multilingual solution (even the
interface can be translated in many languages) - I think that would be a
wonderful solution. (Apparently Universal Library is also part of the
Open Content Alliance which runs the Open Library).

**The amazement of diving into the collections**\
 Either way, I hope these technical issues are solved, because this is
an incredibly revolutionary project. Already a million books are
available in Chinese, both out of copyright and ones they have been able
to negotiate rights for… I could spend days doing all kinds of weird
searches, finding Chinese books written hundred and fifty years ago
about Norwegian folk tales, the cultural system in China, or Esperanto.
This is also providing me with a renewed motivation to learn classical
Chinese (wenyan), because of course most of the books are written in
both traditional characters and classical Chinese. And the availability
of such a treasure trove of books in Hindi and Urdu, is a huge incentive
to my current efforts to learn Hindi!

**Vital projects for humanity**\
 I think these efforts are some of the most important going on right
now, and they deserve a lot more financial support than they are
getting! I would love to see these scanning efforts also expanding to
other countries and languages. And especially working hard to try to
secure copyrights or permissions for even newer books. One of the only
books on the history of libraries in Indonesia, “Perpustakaan Indonesia
dari zaman ke zaman” from 1966 is obligatory reading for anyone wanting
to do research on the history of libraries and literacy in Indonesia,
but it is not available online, and in the US only in a few tattered
copies that are sent back and forth between research libraries on
inter-library loan (I got mine from a US institution on ILL). There is
no way you can convince me that putting that online would constitute
anything immoral!

What’s more, many of these collections are incredibly vulnerable and are
disappearing - I have myself seen the results of high humidity and low
maintenance budgets in Indian university libraries, with old books
falling apart. Not to mention archives of millions of manuscripts
written on palm leaves, etc. We cannot afford to loose this heritage!\
 **\
 Keep us up to date!**\
 One thing that I find lacking from both projects is a good project
blog, that is kept up to date. As a big supporter, I would like to know
how their work is going, what their current bottle-neck is, what they
are working on. Not in annual reports, but in daily or weekly reports.
Most of the “news” on the Universal Library site is not dated, and the
statistics of scanned books are a year old. If people knew more about
what was going on, they would be in a much better position to offer
suport, both direct, and indirect.

Stian
