---
title: Reading list dump
created_at: Mon, 07 Apr 2008 16:50:00 +0000
kind: article
tags: books
---

I keep a list of books or articles to read. Sometimes I have kept it as
a Google Mail draft, this one I transferred from there into DevonThink.
It’s not structured in any way, the entries are messy, often quick
copies and pastes, just enough information to be able to Google
something. These are things I come across surfing, reading, which one
day, I will check out. Might not read them all, but I’ll check them out.
So that when I am in the library, not looking for anything in
particular, I can look up this list and check out a few really
interesting books. It’s worked well so far, and just having a place to
dump stuff and come back to it later, makes me less overwhelmed by all
the amazing interesting stuff I come across. For some reason I don’t
feel stressed by the feeling that I have to read everything - it’s a
resource guide, not a task list.

I don’t know how this would be useful to anyone, since it’s highly
personal, chosen on the basis of what sounds interesting, now what I
have already read and found useful, not annotated etc. But the marginal
cost of me copying and pasting it here is extremely low, the marginal
cost for you in skipping this post is also very low, and thus it only
needs to be useful to one or two people within the next few years, for
this to make sense. And I guess I can consider it a personal backup.

In a way, it would make a lot of sense for me keeping this in a personal
wiki, viewable to the world, but I find that for tiny things like these,
it takes too much time going to a wiki page, clicking edit this page,
inserting it etc. GMail is always open in my browser, and DevonThink
always open in my MacBook, so it’s very fast. I might find better ways
of doing this in the future.

Stian

* * * * *

 Every Day is for The Thief“.\
 Teaching Tips : Strategies, Research, and Theory for College and
University Teachers (Paperback)\
 by Wilbert J. McKeachie (Author), Graham Gibbs (Author)\
 Reconstructing the University: Worldwide Shifts in Academia in the
Twentieth Century\
 by David John Frank and Jay Gabler. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press, 2006. 248 pp. \$19.95 (paper). ISBN 978-0-8047-5376-8.

Guston’s Between Politics and Science: Assuring the Integrity and
Productivity of Research (2000)

the bottom billion

brilliant stuff:
http://www.cormaggio.org/wiki/index.php?title=Supervisory\_meetings/Jan\_15\_2007

http://en.wikiversity.org/wiki/Wikiversity:Reports/15\_January\_2007

http://jilltxt.net/txt/researchblogs.html

http://en.wikiversity.org/wiki/User:Jtneill

http://www.estigmergia.net/wiki/Wlog

http://jokaydia.com/2008/04/01/the-virtual-classroom-project/

http://www.teachandlearn.ca/blog/2008/03/19/the-embedded-practitioner/

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:WikiProject\_Wikidemia

http://en.wikiversity.org/wiki/Developing\_Wikiversity\_through\_action\_research

Higher Education in Canada: Different Systems, Different Perspectives
(Garland Reference Library of Social Science) (Library Binding)\
 by Glen A. Jones (Author) “Canada is a challenging country, both to
understand and to describe…” (more)\
 \
 http://www.elearnspace.org/media/worldwithoutcourses/player.html
(video)

Asian Translation Traditions

“Halting State”

“So What Are You Going to Do with That?”: Finding Careers Outside
Academia (Paperback)

Case of 9 speluncean explorers - P Suber
http://www.earlham.edu/\~peters/writing/cse.htm

The Pirate’s Dilemma, Matt Mason\
 Indonesian Education: Teachers, Schools, and Central Bureaucracy\
 by Christopher Bjork. New York: Routledge, 2006. 190 pp. \$75.00
(cloth). ISBN 0-4159-7444-5.

The New Immigration: An Interdisciplinary Reader\
 By Marcelo M. Suárez-Orozco, Carola Suárez-Orozco, Desiree Baolian Qin

Higher Education: Handbook of Theory and Research\
 By John C Smart

The Reconquest of Montreal: Language Policy and Social Change in a
Bilingual …\
 By Marc V. Levine

Petra Östergren’s Porr, Horror och Feminister, the

Policy and Practice in Bilingual Education: A Reader Extending the
Foundations

http://books.google.ca/books?id=lToDAAAACAAJ&dq=Hari+Kunzru&hl=en&prev=http://www.google.ca/search?q=hari+kunzru&ie=utf-8&oe=utf-8&rls=org.mozilla:en-US:official&client=firefox-a&sa=X&oi=print&ct=result&cd=1&cad=author-navigational

seeking begumpura

Maximum City: Bombay lost and found\
 Janaki Nair’s The Promise of the Metropolis : Bangalore’s Twentieth
Century

A History of African Higher Education from Antiquity to the Present: A
Critical Synthesis\
 by Y. G-M. Lulat. Westport, CT: Praeger, 2005. Pp. xii+624. \$94.00
(cloth). ISBN 0-313-32061-6.

Here Comes Everybody: The Power of Organizing Without Organizations
(Hardcover)

Scholarship in the Digital Age\
 Information, Infrastructure, and the Internet\
 Christine L. Borgman

http://www.ted.com/talks/view/id/207 - how design works

Consolation\
 A Novel\
 Written by Michael Redhill\
 Tuna karya, jilbab and cow-boy hat: Youth in Suharto’s Indonesia as
reflected in the works of Remy Sylado and Emha Ainun Nadjib\*

Author: Scherer, Savitri

Source: Indonesia and the Malay World, Volume 34, Number 99, July 2006 ,
pp. 197-211(15)

Publisher: Routledge, part of the Taylor & Francis Group

mazrui, african universities

“Videodrome”\
 This movie is about a guy who runs an “unauthorized” cable channel in
Toronto that plays violence and porn. One night, apparently trying to
“find more material,” he stumbles across some satellite transmission put
out by aliens or something. Unfortunately, he doesn’t just ignore it and
watch more porn. He tries to find out what it is. Oh well, I guess the
movie has to be interesting somehow. 10 p.m. \$5. The Loft Cinema, 3233
E. Speedway Blvd.

[This work was] inspired by William Cronon’s article, “The Trouble with
Wilderness; or, Getting Back to the Wrong Nature,” which argues that the
concept of wilderness is a historical and cultural construct and relying
on it as the basis of environmental ethics fails to imagine new,
healthy, and sustainable relationships between humans and the
environments they actually inhabit.

TNR | The Limits of Language by Thomas Nagel\
 k The Pirate’s Dilemma: How Youth Culture Is Reinventing Capitalism,

Articles to read:\
 interview friedman, from freakonomics\
 http://www.digitalnpq.org/archive/2006\_winter/friedman.html

sexual econ of mainstream bombay cinema\

http://www.shaker.nl/Catalogus/view.asp?ISBN=90-423-0266-6&doc=INH&view=frame
(ISS)

time mgmt pavlina\
 http://www.stevepavlina.com/articles/time-management.htm

abt kensington market york student presto\
 http://www.culturalstudies.ca/proceedings04/pdfs/fraser.pdf

http://muse.jhu.edu/demo/cinema\_journal/v040/40.1lu.pdf\
 foreign babes in beijing, soap operas in CHina

science of rich: why so hard to share:\
 http://www.newscientist.com/article.ns?id=dn7107

good blog anthro/econ? mcdonalds stuff\
 http://www.cultureby.com/trilogy/2005/07/story\_time\_iv\_r.html

red hot ballroom - copyright clearance - blog from kottke\
 http://blog.stayfreemagazine.org/2005/06/mad\_hot\_ballroo.html

http://www.cqcb.com/gb/map/2005-10/23/content\_762584.htm\
 chinese mosuo norwegian?

http://www.cfi-icf.ca/worlds.htmlJohn Paskievich - guy who made czech\
 indian movie.. sth abt ukraine and other. nfb?

http://www.usc.cuhk.edu.hk/wk\_wzdetails.asp?id=1338 Alana boland on
sanxia

http://web.gc.cuny.edu/pcp/about\_uneven.htmlbook about urban geography\
 by cuny prof, avail online

Feeding fears: competing discourses of interdependency, sovereignty,\
 and China’s food security

Author: Boland A.

Source:                         Political Geography,            Volume
19, Number 1,\
 January 2000, pp.
55-76(22)                                                     Publisher:

http://www.blackwell-synergy.com/links/doi/10.1111/j.1728-4457.2000.00761.x/enhancedabs/?cookieSet=1\
 fertility language politics identity in Bangladesh

from books to read————–\
 PRSPs - a good idea or just PR? 13 pages\
 http://www.unctad.org/en/docs/gdsmdpbg2420032\_en.pdf\
 http://worldpolicy.org/journal/volumes.html\
 http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/49/17/35191532.pdf\
 SIDA distance education S-E Asia (190 p).eval

http://www.idrc.ca/en/ev-52226-201-1-DO\_TOPIC.html involving community
ict dev’l\
 http://www.idrc.ca/en/ev-89287-201-1-DO\_TOPIC.html ict l-am\
 languages of instruction in africa, idrc\
 http://www.idrc.ca/en/ev-9304-201-1-DO\_TOPIC.html

internet banking thailand\

http://www.ingentaconnect.com/search/article;jsessionid=1j772ht50uaet.alice?title=push+factors&title\_type=tka&year\_from=1998&year\_to=2005&database=1&pageSize=20&index=3

western europe model communist studies\

http://www.ingentaconnect.com/search/article;jsessionid=1j772ht50uaet.alice?title=push+factors&title\_type=tka&year\_from=1998&year\_to=2005&database=1&pageSize=20&index=6

http://www.american.edu/sis/idp/resources/Druschel%20SRP.pdf

http://econ.worldbank.org/external/default/main?pagePK=64165259&theSitePK=469372&piPK=64165421&menuPK=64166322&entityID=000012009\_20051021094619\
 worldbank braindrain

http://www.cgdev.org/content/publications/detail/3940 mdgs are wrong\
 talent and global migration\
 http://www.cgdev.org/content/publications/detail/4473

http://www.migrationinformation.org/Profiles/display.cfm?ID=20\
 (1) http://www.leadinglearning2006.yorku.ca/program.html

http://moodle.org/\
 http://www.bbc.co.uk/wales/capturewales/\
 http://www.skypejournal.com/\
 full access phones bangladesh short article\

http://journalsonline.tandf.co.uk/media/84v16cpkgk5ttv404w3p/contributions/g/v/l/b/gvlbulfxfe2t34xx\_html/fulltext.html

info and comm tech and large-scale poverty reduction\
 http://www.deza.admin.ch/ressources/deza\_product\_en\_2197.pdf

http://www.iicd.org/

handbook participatory rural communications appraisal\
 ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/008/y5793e/y5793e00.pdf

communication initiative some nice links\
 http://www.comminit.com/

village phone program replication manual (7mb pdf)\

http://www.itu.int/osg/spu/newslog/ct.ashx?id=2d764ae8-dbb5-4787-b213-f21d7ce2c462&url=http%3a%2f%2fwww.infodev.org%2ffiles%2f2868\_file\_VillagePhoneReplicationManual.pdf\
 qualitative research, not too long.\
 http://pweb.sophia.ac.jp/%7Et-oka/papers/2000/qrsw/qrsw.html\#s1

http://www.reliefweb.int/rw/lib.nsf/db900SID/LHON-67EHB9?OpenDocument\
 - harms-benefits manual CARE

http://archives.cbc.ca/IDC-1-69-1433-9253/life\_society/chinese\_immigration/\
 discussion on chinese identity\
 They have some interesting links. In case you are interested.\
 http://www.chsa.org/\
 –

TNR | The Limits of Language by Thomas Nagel\
 k The Pirate’s Dilemma: How Youth Culture Is Reinventing Capitalism,

http://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=RzMtEp69gmMC&oi=fnd&pg=PA195&dq=%22Alidou%22+%22Medium+of+Instruction+in+Post-Colonial+Africa%22+&ots=K1VLi8NDQt&sig=aBpIuzKArSZk4Zf9wZeo9LB2uF0

Wizard of the Crow: A novel (Hardcover)\
 by Ngugi Wa’Thiong’O (Author)

Usha R Jain Hindi reader multimedia\
 http://wo.uio.no/as/WebObjects/theses.woa/wa/these?WORKID=58212\

http://www.amazon.com/Design-Future-Things-Donald-Norman/dp/0465002277/ref=nosim\

http://www.amazon.com/Design-Everyday-Things-Donald-Norman/dp/0465067107/ref=nosim\
 Moffatt, Catherine. “Development Unmoored” in Anti-Colonialism and
Education: The Politics of Resistance. eds. George J. Sefa Dei and Arlo
Kemepf. (from OISE, UofT) 2006\
 China Scholars Series: Chinese linguist, phonologist, composer and
author, Yuen Ren Chao . An Interview Conducted by Rosemany Levenson,
with an introduction by Mary Haas.\
 Doing School”: How We Are Creating a Generation of Stressed Out,
Materialistic, and Miseducated Students

David Devdas, journalist, filmmaker, scholar, has a new book, In Search
of a Future: The story of Kashmir\
 Fredrik Härén -idea guy, used to live in China\
 monograph tani barlow?\
 book history reader / an introduction to the history of the book
mccleery\

http://www.cerna.ensmp.fr/Enseignement/CoursEcoIndus/SupportsdeCours/COASE.pdf\
 coase - theory of transactional costs, better than world is flat,
opened

blessed unrest\
 stumbling on happiness

jane jacobs and the face of new york (rel to exhibition)\
 http://www.ssrn.com/ submit thesis here\
 http://lessig.org/blog/2007/10/corruption\_lecture\_alpha\_versi.html\
 Indonesian Literature Vs New Order Orthodoxy: The Aftermath Of
1965-1966\
 By Anna-Greta Nilsson Hoadley\
 3. Anarchism and Chinese Political Culture. New York: Columbia
University Press, 1990. - peter zarrow

http://www.lulu.com/content/1554599 situated spaces urban computing and
its discontents

write Wikipedia article about He Zhen

In quest of quality education and literature : an autobiography /
Jagannath Mohanty with Sudhansu Mohanty.

Until recently, one had to be literate in Chinese to have access to,
for\
 instance, the fascinating work of Dai Jinhua (Peking University,
Cinema\
 Studies Department) or Hui Shui-Lun and Lao Kin Chi (Lingnan Univer-\
 sity, Hong Kong), who are increasingly frequent collaborators in
Chinese\
 publication venues. (Dai’s work in translation is forthcoming under
the\
 title Cinema and Des~re.)~ before the Marxist poststructuralist femi-\
 Even\
 nism of Dai and her colleagues, Chen You-shih’s pioneering
transnational\
 Chinese feminist journal N&zn./ren had initiated discussion of
feminist\
 humanism in the late 1980s. This is not even to mention the research
pro-\
 jects of feminist scholars like Liu Bohong and others within the Party
appa-\
 ratus itself, or independent operatives like Liang Xiaoyan, Luo Suwen,
Li\
 Huiying, and many others. Even in English-language publications,
collab-\
 orators like Huang Ping and Elizabeth Croll, Tan Shen and Christina\
 Gilmartin have targeted the effects of economic reform and
liberalization\
 on female labor and female citizens. Li Xiaojiang, a feminist
provocateur

Others are seeing the link between participatory culture and some of the
core objectives for education. People like Renee Fountain have prepared
resources that describe wiki pedagogy, or Peter Rawsthorne looking for
ways to apply learner generated curriculum and content.\
 http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/issue12\_3/keats/index.html

nordic cinema in transition\
 http://books.google.com/books?id=OjKad6rDXwsC

a small matter of programming - recom from hackety

https://www.technologyreview.com/emtech/videos/?page=reg4&redi=T\#

http://www.carnegie.org/sub/program/foundationdocs/StoriesOfChange.pdf
stories of change - african universities

St Clair W (2005) The Political Economy of Reading London: School of
Advanced Study, University of London,\
 available at: www.sas.ac.uk/ies/Publications/johncoffin/stclair.pdf

http://e-learning-teleformacion.blogspot.com/2007/09/juan-freire.html

check out core, see if you can find research articles. or use chinese
academic search.

http://www.everythingismiscellaneous.com/

http://robmba.blogspot.com/2007/09/pedagogy-vs-andragogy.html

http://www.guni-rmies.net/news/detail.php?id=1103

Seymour Papert - books on computers and teaching, from opened (many at
OISE, one at UTSC Robarts)

Instructional-design theories and models. Volume II, A new paradigm of
instructional theory\
 by Charles M Reigeluth

http://www.elanguage.cn/

http://www.unesco.org/iiep/virtualuniversity/home.php virtual university

anguage, power and pedagogy : bilingual children in the crossfire\
 Cummins, Jim, 1949-\
 OISE/UT Library Copies Type Location\
 370.1175 C971L 1 Book Stacks

http://www.boingboing.net/2007/09/22/polish-bhangra-music.html

Behind The Scenes Of Hindi Cinema: A Visual Journey Through The Heart Of
Bollywood\
 | Hardcover at OISE\
 Johan Manschot |

Beshears, F. (2005), Viewpoint: The Economic Case for Creative Commons\
 Textbooks, Campus Technology, September, available at:
www.campustechnology.\
 com/print.asp?ID=11891.

D’Antoni, S. in Sir John Daniel et al. (2006), eLearning and Free Open
Source\
 Software: the Key to Global Mass Higher Education? Malaysia.\
 Commonwealth of Learning, available at:\
 www.col.org/speeches/JD\_0601eLearningKualaLumpur.htm.

MIT evaluation reports\
 Hilton, J. (2006), “The Future for Higher Education – Sunrise or
Perfect\
 Storm?”, Educause Review, March/April.\
 Hylén, J. (2006), “ParisTech ‘Graduate School’ – A Case Study in Open\
 Educational Resources Production and Use in Higher Education”.\
 Kobayashi, T. and A. Kawafuchi (2006), “Japan OCW Consortium (JOCW) –
A\
 Case Study in Open Educational resources Production and Use in Higher\
 Education”, July.\
 Koppi, T., L. Bogle and N. Lavitt (2003), “Institutional Use of
Learning Objects\
 Three Years on: Lessons Learned and Future Directions”, University of
New\
 South Wales, Australia.

Redefining Our Relationships: Guidelines For Responsible Open
Relationships (Paperback)\
 by Wendy-O Matik (Author)

The Ethical Slut: A Guide to Infinite Sexual Possibilities (Paperback)\
 by Dossie Easton (Author), Catherine A. Liszt (Author) - order ill

rocw.raifoundation.org - was down, ocw from indian unis

http://www.oecd.org/document/33/0,3343,en\_2649\_35845581\_38981601\_1\_1\_1\_1,00.html\
 schooling in the future - starterpack

blue blood\
 “Cosmopolitanism” (WW Norton, 2006). For Appiah,\
 ” The Box: How the Shipping Container Made the World Smaller and the
World Economy Bigger” at UTSC

Shannon Brownlee’s new Overtreated: Why Too Much Medicine is Making Us
Sicker and Poorer,\
 Philip Altbach and Toru Umakoshi (eds.), Asian Universities: Historical
Perspectives and Contemporary Challenges (Baltimore and London: The
Johns Hopkins University Press, 2004).

http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/issue12\_9/hillesund/

Jim Cummins

The Long Boom: A Vision for the Coming Age of Prosperity (Paperback)\
 by Peter Schwartz (Author),

Genevieve Bell\
 Walt Crawford books lIS\
 poptech podcasts\
 documentary: SCALE: Ending the Bush Agenda in the Media Age\
 RSS talk on itconversations

normative economics, joseph heath
http://www.chass.utoronto.ca/\~jheath/text/table.html\
 the social limits to growth, fred hirsch

a letter to our teacher (italian - ref blog post open ed)

International Communication: English Language Challenges for Malaysia”
(Universiti Putra Malaysia Press). She successfully led a two-year
(’03-’05) research project on “Language Policy and Planning in Higher
Education: Responding to the Needs of the Knowledge Economy

The Contribution of Language to the Transformation, Reconstruction and
Development of South Africa (2002) and English as a Second Language in
South Africa’s Tertiary Institutions: A Case Study at the University of
Pretoria. World Englishes, Vol 21 (1), pp. 49-61.

The International Handbook of English Language Teaching (Springer, 2007)
(co-edited with Chris Davison) and Literacy, Technology, and Diversity:
Teaching for Success in Changing Times (Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 2007)
(with Kristin Brown and Dennis Sayers). - jim cummins oise

Medium of Instruction Policies? Whose Agenda? Which Agenda? (2004),
Culture and Identity in Asian Contexts (2007),

English-only Europe? Challenging Language Policy

For me professionally, it was Future libraries : dreams, madness &
reality

For me personally, it was Man’s Search for Meaning. Man’s search for
meaning : an introduction to logotherapy

The academic library and the net gen student : making the connections

Studying Students: The Undergraduate Research Project at the University
of Rochester - will be available online for free

Emerald City: An Environmental History of Seattle

narrative theory of learning

the economic naturalist (google talk)

limtreets historie, spes i norge.

arkitekturhistorie for norge, offentlige bygninger - brutalismen etc

museologi, spes utstillinger

http://www.lifeweek.com.cn/2003-09-10/000016616.shtml\
 An Alternate History of the 21st Century by William Shunn\
 bruce mau

Charles Vest’s The American Research University from World War II to
World Wide Web . Vest was president of MIT when OpenCourseWare was
proposed, and has been one of the strongest proponents of the project
and the concept.

http://webtv.univ-lyon2.fr/article.php3?id\_article=599\
 the diving bell and the butterfly, mind hacks paralyzed boing2\
 http://www.km4dev.org/\

http://www.archive.org/download/JasminaTesanovicsNefertiti/NefertitiWasHere.pdf

Great Neighborhood Book: A Doityourself Guide to Placemaking
(Paperback)\
 A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings, Construction (Center for
Environmental Structure Series) (Hardcover)\
 City Comforts: How to Build an Urban Village, Revised Edition
(Paperback)

morten flate paulsen om nett og avstandslaering

nassim taleb, the black swan, check it out

ivo andric the bridge over drina\
 Indonesisches Sekundenbuch - Detik-Detik Indonesia\
 That is from David Warsh’s                       Knowledge and the
Wealth of Nations.  Maybe this is the book of the year so far (I can no
longer remember how much I liked Stumbling on Happiness).

Ryszard Kapuściński’s “The Shadow of the Sun” - Africa lauded by
GeekCorpse volunteers.

Jonathan Lethem - wrote great essay on copyright. 7 novels\
 Echolalias On the Forgetting of Language Daniel Heller-Roazen\
 Lewis Hyde’s book,                    The Gift

http://lifelongactivist.com/sample-chapters - recommended by Stallman

control room - movie made by TED person who wants everyone in the world
to watch the same movie

Cummings, William K. (2003):   The Institutions of Education,      
Oxford: Symposium Books.   Chapter 1-6 and chapter 9. (150 p.).

McLean, Martin (1995):   Educational traditions compared: content,
teaching and learning in industrialised countries,       London: David
Fulton.   Chapter 2. (28 p.)\*.
