---
title: Celebrating first book read in a foreign language
created_at: 2008-07-19 00:00:00 -0400
kind: article
tags:
  - books
  - India
---

There are many different milestones when learning a new language. They
are important to measure ones progress, especially important since often
I am learning independently, and don’t have the crutch of thinking - if
I passed the test successfully, then my studies must be on track. But
equally or more importantly, they provide a great sense of satisfaction
and encouragement which is crucial, because learning new languages takes
a long time, and often one can “plateu” and have the feeling of no
progress for a long period of time. Then, when milestones or
breakthroughs occur, it makes it all seem worth it.

When asked how many languages I know, I am often tempted to ask “How
well does one have to know a language, for it to count?”. Indeed I ask
myself that question often. To me, there are a number of “indicators” or
goals. Partly, they also represent different sub-skills, and as such,
your listening might be better in one language, and your speaking in
another, depending both on the language, and on the setting in which I
learnt it.

Having a conversation in a language that goes relatively smoothly, being
able to watch a movie in the language without subtitles, understanding a
news broadcast on TV, getting through a newspaper, being able to listen
to an audiobook, are all great goals. But perhaps the one main goal in
learning a new language, is *getting through my first book*. Since I am
just about to finish my first book in Hindi, I was thinking last night
about the “first books” in different languages that I have learnt.
Surprisingly I remember both which book, and when, for most of the
languages. So here is a short list.

![](http://g-ecx.images-amazon.com/images/G/01/ciu/08/b7/1f1d228348a0795a5eb1f010._AA280_.L.jpg)**Norwegian
(and Nordic)** - Norwegian is my mother tongue and as such its
impossible to say which was my first proper “book”, since I was learning
from age 5. Even in Swedish and Danish I cannot tell for sure, although
it is possible that my first book read in Danish was *The Woman and the
Ape* (Kvinden og aben), by Peter Høeg. Till this day, I love reading in
Norwegian, and many of my favorite authors are Norwegian. I also read
lots in Swedish, and enjoy audiobooks from both languages. Danish is
much rarer, but I would like to read more.

**English** - *Little Lord Fauntleroy*, in 7th grade. I remember that
the direct speech was quite difficult, perhaps because it was written in
a dialect or sociolect. I remember getting a collection of Robert Ludlum
books for Christmas during jr. high, and becoming very impressed by the
advanced narrative techniques, which also influenced my own school
writing (in Norway we predominantly do creative writing until high
school). So far, I have probably read more in English than I ever read
in Norwegian.

**German** - Not quite sure if this was the first, but I remember
reading *The Last Juror* by John Grisham on a ferry in Europe, doing
Europe by car with the family, the summer I turned 16. Although I read
German quite fluently, I have not found that many others  that I really
enjoyed, but Herman Hesse remains one of my favorites - especially
*Siddharta*, which I read while hitchhiking in Austria during my last
year of high school.

![](http://miresperanto.narod.ru/biblioteko/margarita/margarita.JPG)**Italian**
- My first book was a non-fiction manual on how to teach English to
Italians, of all things, checked out from Monfalcone library, where I
often went. That was where I first noticed the problem of getting sleepy
while reading a foreign language. I would enter, completely rested, and
after just 20 minutes of reading a book in Italian, my eyelids would
weigh a ton. I later found a lot of Italian authors that I really liked,
like Italo Calvino, Primo Levi, Nathalie Ginzburg, and primo inter
pares, Andrea De Carlo.

**Esperanto** - Not sure if this came before or after Italian, but
during my first year in high school I read a manual on teaching
Esperanto using la zagreba metodo. After this, I have read much in
Esperanto, but not many full books. I remember enjoying*La majstro kaj
Margarita* (by Russian writer Bulgakov), as well as a biography of
Zamenhof by Marjorie Boulton. **Chinese** - One of the most amazing
milestones in learning a language is when you are slowly making your way
through your first book, forcing yourself to read ten pages before going
to bed, and then suddenly one night, when you have reached the allotted
ten pages, thinking “I’ll just read one more page, I want to see what
will happen”! I remember this happening with my first Chinese novel,
俗不可耐 (su bu ke nai), about expats and Chinese overseas returnees in
Beijing. After this, I’ve read a number of novels in Chinese, but sad to
say, to this day my reading speed is not high enough to be able to
really “get into it”.

![](http://www.chineseculture.net/sbkn.jpg)**Russian** - I don’t speak
Russian, but I travelled through Russian-speaking countries several
times, and finally spent a month in Russia at the Russiskiy Universitet
Druzhbi Narodov (Russian People’s Friendship University) with an
absolutely lovely old Russian lady as a teacher. During that time, I
found a bilingual version (facing pages) of Jonathan Livingston Seagull,
and read through it all. I love bilingual books, and hunted through all
of Moscow for more, even had my friend call the publisher, to no avail.
This doesn’t quite count, as I could not make my way through a Russian
novel “unassisted”. At my best, I could kind of make out the meaning of
a newspaper article, but that is almost all forgotten now. I still hope
to go back and learn Russian properly - once I find a nice Russian city
with good vegetarian food.

**Spanish** - Weirdly, my first book in Spanish might have been the same
as the first I read in German. For the German, I am not sure, but for
the Spanish, it certainly was *The Last Juror*, which happened to be
lying around in my friend’s room, during Christmas 2004, half a year
before I would go to Mexico to begin studying Spanish. Since then, I
have read a number of novels in Spanish, and especially enjoy Isabel
Allende.

![](http://figurpublik.com/cetak/apresiasi/images/ronggeng_1.jpg)**Indonesian**
- After hearing everyone in China ask me if Norway has “beautiful
forests”, because they had heard about this book, what would be more
natural than me reading the Japanese “*Norwegian Wood*” by Murakami, in
Indonesian translation, in Jakarta? I bought it on the day before my
25th birthday, on the same day as I saw the first Indonesian film that I
could follow without subtitles (the great Mendadak Dangdut). I went on
to enjoy a lot of Indonesian literature, the best and most profound
reading experience (and most difficult) was perhaps *Ronggeng Dukuh
Paruk*, by Ahmad Tohari (whose *Orang-orang proyek* is also great). I am
still planning to re-read the amazing Pramoedya Ananta Toer’s Buru
Quartet in Indonesian.

![](http://ecx.images-amazon.com/images/I/51N55V47J1L._SL500_AA240_.jpg)**French**
- Not having ever studied the language, but helped by knowledge of
Italian, Spanish and Esperanto, I read the *La Bicyclette Bleu* during
my summer job as a museum guide in 2007. It was a part of a trilogy, and
luckily my local library had all three, so I ended up reading 1200 pages
of French that summer. I hope to read more, or perhaps even learn the
language properly, in the future.

![](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/hi/thumb/b/b9/HPGOFHINDI.jpg/152px-HPGOFHINDI.jpg)**Hindi**
- Although I started reading *Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire* in
parallell (the library where I volunteer has the Hindi version, and I
bought the English version), and reached 170 pages, that was not to be
my first book in Hindi due to the length. On my birthday, Mamta the
librarian took me to a Hindi bookstore, and had me pick out some books
as a birthday gift. I chose four abridged versions of European classics,
and right now am almost finished with *80 Days Around the World*. It’s
still extremely slow going, and I get tired like nothing else, but it’s
a step on the way.

I’ve also begun books in Dutch and Portuguese, but not finished any so
far.

Do you remember what your first book in a foreign language was?

Stian
