---
title: "One size does not fit all: A case study of the spread of OpenCourseWare to India, China and Japan."
created_at: 2009-01-25 00:00:00 -0500
kind: article
tags: asia, china, Colleges and Universities, Education, India, Indian Institute of Technology, Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, open-education, OpenCourseWare, p2pU, personal, University of Toronto, William and Flora Hewlett Foundation
---

I first went to the annual [Comparative and International Education
Society](http://cies.us) conference last year, when it was held at
[Columbia University](http://www.tc.columbia.edu). It's a huge event,
with something like 3.000+ attendees, including a very hefty component
from OISE, both professors and graduate students. It was great going
there only as a participant, and getting the feel for the place. I
remember feeling a bit silly though, because everyone that saw my name
tag which said "University of Toronto", naturally assumed I was at
Ontario Institute for Studies in Education (UofT's faculty of
education), but all I could reply was "no, I'm an undergraduate, but
I've applied"... Very wannabe. This year, I am a bona-fide OISE student,
luckily.

Looking at the program, there are a lot of very interesting sessions
that I am looking forward to. It will also be more fun to go this year,
because I already begin to recognize different theoretical debates, the
"big names" in the field, etc. For example, it will be fun to see Jürgen
Schriewer duck it out with Ramirez and Meyer, after reading so much
about their different conceptions of globalization of education.

I submitted an abstract based on a paper I did for a class on global
governance and educational change, where I tried to apply different
theories to explain why the idea of OpenCourseWare spread to some
countries, and not to others. Here is the abstract:

**One size does not fit all: A case study of the spread of
OpenCourseWare to India, China and Japan.**

*Since its inception in 2002, OpenCourseWare (OCW), a movement to post
university courses online under open licenses, has spread around the
world. Initially proposed by MIT President Charles Vest, and supported
by the William and Flora Hewlett Foundation, this concept has spread to
universities in more than 30 countries in less than six years. In many
cases they have created local and regional consortia, and in some cases
it is supported by the local government. How is such a rapid
dissemination possible, and what does it mean for internationalization
of higher education?*

*This paper will consist of a case study of three Asian countries that
produce OCWs. Japan’s initiative was set up through personal connections
between MIT and Japanese universities, and is independent of the state.
India’s program is not a formal member of the consortium, and consists
of the national open university, and the Indian Institutes of
Technology. China’s Ministry of Education has financially supported the
creation of over 10,000 open courses. I will apply Mintrom’s theory of
policy entrepreneurs and innovation diffusion to analyze the spread of
this movement, and use the three cases to discuss whether OCW is a case
of Ramirez and Meyer’s “global institutionalism”.*

Stian

[![Reblog this post [with
Zemanta]](http://img.zemanta.com/reblog_e.png?x-id=b9b85ddd-4081-4d73-a423-1c7c4aaa9cfc)](http://reblog.zemanta.com/zemified/b9b85ddd-4081-4d73-a423-1c7c4aaa9cfc/ "Zemified by Zemanta")
