---
title: Presentation on OpenCourseWare in China posted to Slideshare
created_at: Thu, 12 Feb 2009 15:32:49 +0000
kind: article
tags:
- china
- events
- open-education
- personal
---

Last week, I attended the Connexions/OpenCourseWare Consortium
conference at [Rice University](http://www.rice.edu/ "Rice University"),
and I gave a presentation on OpenCourseWare in China ([see
abstract](http://reganmian.net/blog/2009/01/25/global-concept-local-practices-state-of-the-research-on-ocw-in-chinese/)).
The presentation roughly touches on three different aspects: The
translation and use of MIT OpenCourseWare in China, the Chinese Ministry
of Education led OpenCourseWare project, and the research on
OpenCourseWare in Chinese. This is my MA research topic, so expect to
hear a lot more about the issue, but this was my first attempt at
synthesizing some of my thoughts and findings, and present them
publicly. I also showcase some of the Chinese OCW sites, and discuss a
number of issues and questions.

I recorded this with Audacity on my laptop during my presentation, and
was able to sync the slides with the audio on
[Slideshare](http://slideshare.net/ "SlideShare"). Note that there is a
minimum delay between each slide, which leads to problems when I show a
number of slides in rapid succession, there is a bit of a lag. That is
corrected as soon as I start speaking longer, however, and shouldn't be
a big problem.

When people asked me questions from the audience, it was not audible on
my built-in microphone, so I dubbed over that with my own voice
repeating the question - which also saves some time for the listener.

Any feedback or questions are very welcome! You can also download only
the [mp3 file](http://reganmian.net/files/ChineseOCWtalkHouston.mp3).

[Global Concept, Local Practices: State of the Research on OCW in
Chinese](http://www.slideshare.net/houshuang/global-concept-local-practices-state-of-the-research-on-ocw-in-chinese-1010243?type=powerpoint "Global Concept, Local Practices: State of the Research on OCW in Chinese")

View more [presentations](http://www.slideshare.net/) from
[houshuang](http://www.slideshare.net/houshuang). (tags:
[china](http://slideshare.net/tag/china)
[chinese](http://slideshare.net/tag/chinese))

Stian
