---
title: "Cantonese the Movie: Killer Tattoo Death Dragon Master Black Hand Massacre Misunderstanding"
created_at: Mon, 27 Apr 2009 08:28:48 +0000
kind: article
tags: china, languages, movies, personal
---

Yes, that is the unlikely title of a short film that I collaborated in
recording in Hong Kong two weeks ago. To find out why, we have to go way
back in time. One day in Toronto, my friend told me about this crazy
Norwegian lady who was teaching Cantonese in Hong Kong. We went on
Youtube and found several interviews of Cecilie, even a
[documentary](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L0mJeINaW54), and saw that
she was indeed really fluent in Cantonese, and also quite feisty.

So when I was in HK for a few days this summer, on a whim I sent her an
email and said, fellow Norwegian in town, would you care to meet up? And
she got back to me saying, we're shooting a movie, care to dress up like
a gangster and act ridiculous? Of course, that's one of my favorite
things to do, so I was instantly in. The next two days, a bunch of
gwailo spent hours practicing their Cantonese lines (I speak Mandarin,
but not Cantonese - the others were better, but none as fluent as
Cecilie), and running around in back alleys with big whigs and ketchup
wounds, to the joy and befuddlement of the Hong Kong seniors sitting on
benches and watching. The result is now available for your enjoyment:

[Cantonese - The Movie, Episode 19: Killer Tattoo Death Dragon Master
Black Hand Massacre Misunderstanding](http://vimeo.com/4274163) from
[Cecilie Gamst Berg](http://vimeo.com/user1632729) on
[Vimeo](http://vimeo.com).

(can also be found on
[Youtube](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gju5Z5RNf8s) together with [her
previous movies](http://www.youtube.com/user/Cantocourse))

Might contain coarse language, gratuitious violence, and very poor
disguises, viewer discretion is advised)

Stian
