---
title: How the world misunderstood the Chinese Top Level Courses Project
created_at: Fri, 03 Dec 2010 14:40:25 +0000
kind: article
tags: academia/research, china, Education, MA thesis, open-education, The Top Level Courses Project
---

*When I attended the OpenCourseWare Consortium meeting in Dalian, China
in 2007, and first heard about the Chinese Top Level Courses Project, I
thought it was created by an organization called CORE. So did virtually
everyone in the international community. It took me a lot of reading and
conversations to understand that it had nothing to do with CORE - not
because there was any evidence to the contrary, but because I was so
convinced that this was the case. So how could the international
community so thoroughly misunderstand what was going on in China for
over 7 years?*

* * * * *

In September 2003, a number of the pioneers behind the MIT
OpenCourseWare project, and a representative from the Hewlett Foundation
which had funded the MIT OpenCourseWare Project, attended a meeting with
Chinese universities at the Beijing Jiaotong University. The meeting had
been organized by Dr. Fun-Den Wang, a retired mining professor from
Colorado, who is also the head of the International Engineering
Technology Foundation (IET), an educational charity. Dr. Fun-Den Wang
was impressed by the vision behind MIT’s OpenCourseWare Project, and
wanted to make these resources available to Chinese universities. The
result of the meeting was the founding of an organization called China
Open Resources for Education (zhongguo kaifang jiaoyu ziyuan lianheti,
中国开放教育资源联合体), which would promote closer interaction and open
sharing of educational resources between China and the world (CORE
2010a).

China Open Resources for Education (CORE) began facilitating the use of
MIT OpenCourseWare by universities in China. They hosted a mirror of all
the courses, so that they could be accessed more rapidly from computers
within China, and funded the translation of some of the courses into
Chinese (CORE 2010b). To date, their website lists 602 foreign courses
that have been translated into Chinese (CORE 2010c). They held several
conferences about Open Educational Resources in China (2006 in Xi’an and
2007 in Beijing), and in 2008 they co-hosted, with the OpenCourseWare
Consortium, the international “Open Education Conference 2008” at Dalian
University of Technology. This conference attracted researchers and
administrators from around China, and around the world (CORE 2010b).

After a while, internationally CORE became synonymous with the Top Level
Courses Project, which they called China Quality OpenCourseWare. Very
little has been written about it in English, but what little there is
tends to portray the project as a derivation of the MIT OpenCourseWare,
with CORE as the founder and organizer. For example, Stephen Carson
(2009), external relations director for MIT OpenCourseWare writes in an
article in Open Learning:

In 2004 collaboration between the Chinese Ministry of Education and
MIT's translation partner CORE would lead to the launch of the China
Quality OpenCourseWare project, an effort to openly publish the best
courses from across the Chinese higher education system. By mid-2005,
materials from more than 500 Chinese courses were available through the
CORE site. This collection of courseware has now grown to over 1600
total courses, some of which are now being translated into English by
the CORE team.

David Wiley (2007, 4) writes in a report to the Organization for
Economic Collaboration and Development that “in China 451 courses have
been made available by 176 university members of the China Open
Resources for Education (CORE) consortium”. Finally, Elpida Makriyannis
(2010), a researcher with the Open University Open Learning Network, set
up to coordinate research on worldwide Open Educational Resources
efforts, describes the development of China Quality OpenCourseWare as
springing out of the fateful meeting to establish CORE in September,
2003.

In fact, the Top Level Courses Project was launched in March 2003, half
a year before the MIT meeting, and was not even mentioned at the meeting
half a year later, where the discussion centered around the translation
of MIT OpenCourseWare courses into Chinese (Duan Chenggui and Liu
Meifeng, personal communications). So how could this misunderstanding
have spread?

**The spread of an understandable myth**To imagine that China Open
Resources for Education organized Chinese universities into producing
China Quality OpenCourseWare is natural, when you think of the
organization of similar projects in most other countries, see for
example [the case studies from the surrounding East-Asian
territories](http://reganmian.net/blog/2010/12/02/case-studies-of-opencourseware-in-japan-taiwan-and-south-korea/)
of Japan, Taiwan and South Korea. At first sight therefore, the Chinese
story seems to fit perfectly into this image. A meeting is organized
between MIT and top Chinese universities, an organization is founded,
and this organization coordinates the production of open course
material. Even the name the project is known under internationally,
China Quality OpenCourseWare, indicates that it is a direct continuation
of MIT’s project.

As we have seen in the previous chapters, the Top Level Courses Project
is something quite different however. It can trace its roots back to the
unique system for course evaluations and quality improvement that
developed in China since 1985, and was developed as a response to the
unprecedented pace of massification of higher education in China, and
the desire to promote pedagogical reform and increased use of IT in
education. The way of organizing the project, the funding mechanism, and
the goals are all different from the OpenCourseWare projects in other
countries.

Yet this information was not readily available. The Ministry of
Education has webpages with information in English about the higher
education system in China, but none of these mention the Top Level
Courses Project. No official publication has ever been put out that
introduces the Top Level Courses Project in English. In fact, it does
not even have an official English translation, which has led to a
multitude of different translations (China Quality OpenCourseWare,
NPWDEC, Top-Quality Courses, etc). Although more than 3,000 academic
papers have been published about aspects of this project in Chinese
academic journals, until recently no significant paper had been
published in English.

This is thus a prime example of the need to look below the surface, as
Schriewer and Martinez (2004) stated, and examine whether the terms we
are employing in fact describe the same thing. China Quality
OpenCourseWare sounds like just another OpenCourseWare, fitting
perfectly in with the other examples in East Asia, and a great example
of world institutionalism, with both organizational models, and values
converging. As we saw above, however, the values inherent in the
OpenCourseWare model seem not to have rubbed off on China, and although
the project might have been inspired in some aspects by the MIT
OpenCourseWare project, it is fundamentally different in organization,
purpose, and presumably outcome. To grasp this however, a deep
understanding of the context of Chinese higher education, and its
history are needed.

In this case, it is not the state that is using “Ausland als Argument”
(Schrieweer and Martinez 2004). Given the positive attitudes toward MIT
OpenCourseWare by Chinese academics and students, the government could
very well have named this project “China Quality OpenCourseWare” and
tried to let their substantially different project benefit from MIT’s
fame, but they never attempted to do such a thing. It is also not the
case, as Steiner-Khamsi and Stolpe (2006) found in Mongolia, that the
state is using specific terms to attract foreign funders. In fact, the
Ministry of Education has chosen not to engage internationally at all
around this project, not releasing any information in English, nor even
providing an official English translation of the project.

Into this void stepped the organization China Open Resources for
Education. They were able to get international recognition, and funding,
because the world believed they were promoting an international model in
China. According to Steiner-Khamsi and Quist (2000), many local NGOs
master “NGO-speak” and focus exclusively on initiatives for which they
are likely to get international funding. In addition, the funder, in
this case the Hewlett foundation, willingly went along.

Steiner-Khamsi describes international organizations that have developed
a portfolio of “best practices”, as well as corresponding management
structure that serves the dissemination and supervision of these
practice, such as Save the Children U.S. and community based education,
the Open Society Institute/Soros Foundation and critical thinking, or
DANIDA and student-centered learning (Steiner-Khamsi 2004). The Hewlett
Foundation has also built up a large portfolio of open education
projects, and it was easy for them to fund a Chinese project that looked
similar to what they were used to.

* * * * *

The quotes in this text is from the MA Thesis "The Chinese National Top
Level Courses Project: Using Open Educational Resources to Promote
Quality in Undergraduate Teaching" by Stian Håklev, University of
Toronto 2010.

-   Download this thesis:
  [PDF](http://reganmian.net/top-level-courses/Haklev_Stian_201009_MA_thesis.pdf)[DOC](http://reganmian.net/top-level-courses/Haklev_Stian_201009_MA_thesis.doc)
  [ODT](http://reganmian.net/top-level-courses/Haklev_Stian_201009_MA_thesis.odt)
  [RTF](http://reganmian.net/top-level-courses/Haklev_Stian_201009_MA_thesis.rtf)[ePub](http://reganmian.net/top-level-courses/top-level-courses.epub)
  [Mobi
  (Kindle)](http://reganmian.net/top-level-courses/top-level-courses.mobi)
-   [Central page collecting all blog posts, many different download
  formats, and supplementary
  material](http://http://reganmian.net/top-level-courses)

* * * * *
