---
title: "Chinese higher ed after the Cultural Revolution: continuity and change"
created_at: Tue, 05 Oct 2010 14:50:13 +0000
kind: article
tags:
- academia/research
- china
- Education
- MA thesis
---

In discussing the reestablishment of the university system after the
Cultural Revolution, Pepper (1990, 131) believes it was essentially a
continuation of the pre-Cultural Revolution model from the 1960s:

In all other respects, the university system that was reestablished
between 1977 and 1980 essentially replicated the antebellum model of the
1960s, which was essentially the same as the Sino-Soviet compromise
variation that had emerged from the early 1950s pro-Soviet period.
Hence, all of that system's centralized features abolished during the
1966-76 decade were restored. These included the national unified
college entrance examinations, unified enrolment and job assignment
plans, unified curricula, and systematized rules and regulations for
everything.

As an example, the “Decision on unifying management in higher education”
was affirmed by the Central Committee in 1979, and the Ministry of
Education was again given the role of regulating nationally standard
teaching plans, teaching outlines, and textbooks. The Ministry of
Education only administered 38 higher institutions directly, but it made
all major curricular decisions for the 226 institutions administered by
other national ministries, and the 411 institutions administered by
provinces, municipalities and autonomous regions (Hayhoe 1987).

However, change was coming, and the changes to the “The Sixty Articles”,
which had originally been proposed in the retrenchment period of the
early 1960s, were harbingers of greater openness. Universities were to
be centres of both teaching and research, as of the Decision on Reform
promulgated in 1985, not only of teaching, and intellectuals were to be
regarded as part of the working class, thus having greater freedom of
action (cited in Zhou Yuliang 1986, 461). There was also a small
increase in the power of university presidents, although the role of the
party committee was still important (Hayhoe 1989).

With the 1985 reform, the government aimed to:

change the management system of excessive government control of the
institutions of higher education, expand decision-making in the
institutions under the guidance of unified educational policies and
plans of the state, strengthen the connection of the institutions of
higher education with production organizations, scientific research
organizations and other social establishments, and enable the
institutions of higher education to take the initiative and ability to
meet the needs of economic and social development. (cited in Hayhoe
1989, 40-41).

Universities gained much leverage in adjusting the objectives of various
disciplines, formulating their own teaching plans and programs,
compiling and selecting teaching materials (Hayhoe 1991). There was also
a reduction in required course hours in favor of electives, more time
for self-study and student initiatives. The role of the Ministry of
Education was no longer to produce authoritative teaching plans and
outlines, but rather to organize teaching material committees (jiaoyu
ziliao hui, 教育资料会) and guide the development of material. It also
acquired foreign curricular material from from a wide range of
countries, not only the Soviet Union, but also Japan, Germany, France,
and the United States, among others, and organized their translation and
distribution (Hayhoe 1989).

* * * * *

The quotes in this text is from the MA Thesis "The Chinese National Top
Level Courses Project: Using Open Educational Resources to Promote
Quality in Undergraduate Teaching" by Stian Håklev, University of
Toronto 2010.

-   [Download the canonical PDF
  version](http://reganmian.net/top-level-courses/Haklev_Stian_201009_MA_thesis.pdf)
-   [Central page collecting all blog posts, many different download
  formats, and supplementary
  material](http://reganmian.net/top-level-courses)

* * * * *
