---
title: "OER and P2PU: Talk at Indira Gandhi National Open University"
created_at: Wed, 20 Jan 2010 07:40:31 +0000
kind: article
tags: delhi, Education, egyankosh, events, ignou, India, oa, ocw, oer, open access, open-education, openness, p2pU, personal, tech
---

I have been very interested in the work of [Indira Gandhi National Open
University](http://www.ignou.ac.in/) (IGNOU) for a long time. It's one
of the mega-universities in the world, perhaps the biggest, with close
to two million students. I wrote a very excited
[post](http://reganmian.net/blog/2008/12/05/worlds-largest-university-opens-almost-all-its-materials/)
earlier about how they have opened almost all of their educational
material, and I continue to believe that this is one of the most
under-reported OER stories. Therefore, I was very excited to be able to
meet with [Dr. Uma
Kanjilal](http://www.wikieducator.org/User:Ukanjilal), who is head of
the IGNOU [eGyankosh](http://www.egyankosh.ac.in/), and [Dr Sanjaya
Mishra](http://teachknowlogist.blogspot.com/), to learn more about their
future plans for eGyankosh, share some of my ideas, and also discuss the
Peer2Peer University.

I am planning to write more about what I learnt later, but for now, I
wanted to share the presentation that I gave to a group of people at
IGNOU. I focused on three areas: The purposes of OER, the value of
openness, and the Peer2Peer University. It was an honor to share my
thoughts with such an engaging and intelligent audience, and I really
hope I get a chance to go back and spend more time with IGNOU in the
future.

The presentation below has been synced audio+slides, so you can listen
to the audio, and the slides will turn automatically. You can also
download the
[MP3](http://reganmian.net/file/talk%20ignou%20jan%202010.mp3) directly.

[Open Educational Resources and Peer2Peer
University](http://www.slideshare.net/houshuang/oer-and-p2pu "Open Educational Resources and Peer2Peer University")

View more [presentations](http://www.slideshare.net/) from
[houshuang](http://www.slideshare.net/houshuang).

Stian
