---
title: Is TD "aapna" bank? Appealing to the South Asian community
created_at: 2010-05-03 00:00:00 -0400
kind: article
tags:
- asia
- canada
- hindi
- languages
- multilingual
- td bank
- toronto
---

I am trying to purchase a flight ticket, but because I am an
international student, my credit limit is just
1000, *a**n**d**t**h**e**t**i**c**k**e**t**c**o**s**t**s*1, 150. The
fact that I have over 10,000\$ in my account is not important, I can't
seem to buy this ticket. Since I have been a customer of
[CIBC](http://cibc.com)'s for four years, had my VISA card for more than
two years, and spent a lot of money (all promptly repaid), I find it
insulting that they refuse to raise the limit. So I am planning to go
talk to them, and tell them that I will switch banks, if they cannot
provide me with a higher credit limit.

To prepare, I thought I'd visit some other Canadian banks to check out
their offers. Yesterday, at a party, I also met a girl who works for TD,
and sang their praises, so I thought I'd see what kind of card deals
they offer. However, when I went to the TD site, I became fascinated by
something quite different.

At the bottom of the front page, there is a headline "Communities:", and
under that, links to "Chinese, Japanese and South Asian". I am always
very fascinated by how companies and public services in Canada try to
accommodate, or attract, different ethnic and linguistic groups (I have
written about that before
[here](http://reganmian.net/blog/2008/01/10/providing-multilingual-services-if-the-iranian-can-do-it/)),
so I clicked the three links.

The [Chinese](http://www.tdcanadatrust.com/asian/index.jsp) and
[Japanese](http://www.tdcanadatrust.com/japanese/index.jsp) links simply
led to pages introducing TD's services in Chinese (traditional) and
Japanese. This made me very curious – what would be behind [the South
Asian link](http://www.tdcanadatrust.com/southasian/index.jsp)? After
all, South Asia is an area famed for it's linguistic diversity, with not
only a large array of languages, but even a large array of scripts.

[![Banking can be itna
comfortable](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2010/05/Screen-shot-2010-05-03-at-9.23.11-PM.png "Banking can be itna comfortable")](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2010/05/Screen-shot-2010-05-03-at-9.23.11-PM.png)Turns
out, the website is in "Hinglish" – English, interspersed with snippets
of Hindi, written in the Latin script. So, the picture exclaims "Banking
can be itna comfortable" (itna = so), and the following paragraph
states:

> TD Canada Trust is the **sab se aasaan**, convenient and secure way to
> handle your everyday banking, investment and credit needs. Ever since
> we first opened our doors in 1855, **ek cheez kabhi nahi badli** – our
> commitment to our customers, our employees and the community. At TD
> Canada Trust, our goal is to provide a positive banking experience for
> each and every customer.

(My highlights). Sab se aasaan – the most easy, ek cheez kabhi nahi
badli – one thing has never changed (will never change?).

The page continues like this, with lot's of information about their
services, interspersed with short snippets of Hindi. We find out that
"Banking with us is **behtherien aur aasaan**" (better and easy), they
offer a list of "**Sawaal-Jawaab**" (questions and answers). And among
their services, we see that "Telephone **ya** Internet **se banking
karne ki suvidha** – that’s the covenience of *EasyLine* telephone
banking and *EasyWeb* Internet banking with TD Canada Trust." (the
facility to bank with internet or telephone).

[![Aapke sawaal, hamare
jawaab](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2010/05/Screen-shot-2010-05-03-at-9.24.48-PM.png "Aapke sawaal, hamare jawaab")](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2010/05/Screen-shot-2010-05-03-at-9.24.48-PM.png)

So what is the purpose of this? The words that are in Hindi are the most
easy words, so it's clearly not to make it easier to understand for
someone who doesn't speak English very well. Rather, it's to make the
bank seem friendly and welcoming to a "South Asian" community. I have a
few questions:

-   How natural does the text seem to a native Hindi speaker? Although I
  know that this is often done by the educated classes in India, who
  speak Hindi mixing in English, or English mixing in Hindi, this text
  doesn't look quite natural. It seems a bit like someone took an
  English text, and added a few "ethnic" touches. Sort of like when
  the government is putting out a youth-oriented PSA ([about STDs for
  example](http://contexts.org/socimages/2009/02/21/std-brochure-targeting-hip-hop-community/)),
  and inserts some "dude", "yo". It doesn't come across as authentic
  to the recipient.
-   How is this perceived by non-Hindi speaking Indians and other South
  Asians? I have certainly seen ad campaigns with Hindi words in Latin
  script all over India, so it is quite possible that most Indians
  would be familiar with simple words like "aasaan" (simple), "bahut"
  (a lot), etc. But do they perceive this as imposing a
  Hindi-chauvinism, or does it make them nostalgic for "India"? How
  about groups from outside India? Pakistan (although they mainly
  speak Panjabi and Urdu, which are very similar to Hindi in this
  simplified, latinized form), Bangladesh (Bengali, again in the same
  language family, although a bit further away), Sri Lanka (Tamil and
  Sinhalese – all extremely different from Hindi)?

I have seen other ad campaigns in Toronto do this, mix in a few Hindi
words to appeal to a certain community. But this is the first time I've
seen it under the sub-heading "the South Asian community" – meaning it
purports to represent all South Asians.

I know, if you addresses this to "the Nordic Community", and wrote the
whole text in Swedish, Norwegians might feel a bit miffed.

Is there even such a thing as a "South Asian community"? Certainly, in
the region, there is a lot of enmity between some people from different
groups, for example between India and Pakistan, and even within India
between different religions, ethnic groups etc. Do these fade away when
people end up in Toronto, and they find that there are more important
commonalities than differences?

And how did the bank choose to address these three communities? (I am
especially surprised by the Japanese addition – I can understand Chinese
and South Asian, but I didn't realize there were that many Japanese
here). Is it purely based on demographic? ([The most frequently spoken
language in Toronto after English is
Italian](http://www12.statcan.ca/census-recensement/2006/dp-pd/tbt/Rp-eng.cfm?LANG=E&APATH=3&DETAIL=0&DIM=0&FL=A&FREE=0&GC=0&GID=838003&GK=0&GRP=1&PID=89186&PRID=0&PTYPE=88971,97154&S=0&SHOWALL=0&SUB=0&Temporal=2006&THEME=70&VID=0&VNAMEE=&VNAMEF=),
but they don't have their own section). Or based on which groups have
the most problems with understanding English (clearly not the case with
the South Asian example). Or the most wealthy/profitable customers?

Stian
