---
title: "CC Bait and Switch Update: e-Century responds"
created_at: 2010-05-03 00:00:00 -0400
kind: article
tags: cc, creative commons, e-century, open access, p2pU
---

After I wrote my [last blog
post](http://reganmian.net/blog/2010/05/03/open-access-journals-cc-bait-and-switch/)
about how many Open Access journals have confusing or contradictory
licensing information, I sent a brief e-mail to the [e-Century
Publishing Corporation](http://e-century.org/). They publish [The
International Journal of Clinical and Experimental
Pathology](http://www.ijcep.com/), which I used as an example in my blog
post. The blog post was really about a much more general trend, and I
didn't mean to attack e-Century as a "worst case", but since I'd used
them as an example, I felt it was fair to let them know about it.

They could have responded in all kinds of ways, but in fact, within an
hour, I received a very polite reply from Dengshun Wang. With his
permission, I will reprint our e-mail conversation below:

* * * * *

Dear Stian,

Thank you for your e-mail and your mentioning of IJCEP, one of our open
access journals.

Yes, you are right about the copyright confusion among open access
journals. The version of the Copyright Statement copied to your blog is
the most recently updated version from the IJCEP's website.

One of the major reasons for this change was because some companies are
trying to archive the articles published by us for pure commercial
purpose – they will "lock up" all those articles on their websites and
ask readers to pay to access them. This is obviously not right, and
against our intention to keep all articles openly accessable to all
readers, no matter where they are archived.

With the current Copyright statement for our journals, we hope that all
articles will remain as open-access information, no matter where they
are archived.

I hope that you can put this information on your blog, so that the
readers of your blog will better understand why our Copyright is stated
as it is; to be fair and supportive to our effort to promote open
access.

Please feel free to contact us if you have any questions about this.
Thank you for your interest in our work.

Best, Dengshun

* * * * *

Dear Mr. Dengshun Wang,

thank you for getting back to me so promptly.

I wonder if you could help me clarify a little further.

Are you using the CC BY license? In that case - you cannot stop people
from using the articles for commercial benefit. Perhaps you would be
more suited by the CC BY NC (non-commercial) license? This is congruent
with your statement about how you would like the articles to be used.

Regardless of whether you choose CC BY or CC BY NC, would you consider
making this clear on both the article abstract pages, and in the article
PDFs. (Imagine for example, that a friend sends me a PDF of an article
published in your journal. Just looking at the PDF, I would have no way
of knowing that this was released under an open license, and that I was
allowed to, for example, print it and share it with colleagues).

I think clarifying these issues would be very helpful. I strongly
support Open Access publishing, and I wish you all the best in the
endeavor to help spread scientific knowledge more widely!

With your permission, I will post both my e-mails, and your answers,
verbatim to my blog.

Best Stian Haklev

* * * * *

Dear Stian, Thank you for your wonderful suggestion. We will change the
Copyright Statement to "CC BY NC (non-commercial) license" for all of
our journals as you suggested.

Would you please send me a weblink for "CC BY NC (non-commercial)
license" for linking to our copyright statement if you have one?

Thank you for your support. Dengshun

* * * * *

Dear Stian,

We have updated the Copyright Statements in all of our journals, using
Non-Commercial Creative Commons according to your advice. It is indeed
more appropriate to our intention – keeping all articles published in
our journals Open Access, no matter where they are archived or who
archived them:
[http://www.ijcep.com/instructions.html](http://www.ijcep.com/instructions.html)

Yes, it is OK to post our previous e-mails to your blog if you think it
is appropriate.

Best, Dengshun

* * * * *

Dear Dengshun,

you can find the link here.

I look forward to seeing this license clearly stated on your abstracts
and in your article PDFs. Although I personally prefer the CC BY to the
CC BY NC, the latter much better represents your intention, and one of
the main purposes of CC licenses is to clearly signify the intent of the
author/copyright holder.

Best Stian

* * * * *

Dear Stian,

As a response to your concern, we are planning to setup a stand-alone
"Copyright" page on our web site.

We are also looking into the best way to deliver the information about
licenses for articles published by eCPC, and to mention the "Creative
Commons Non-Commercial License" in future publications, which may start
from next volume of each journal, to keep the relative format
consistency of the journal.

Thank you for helping us to clarify this important issue.

Best, Dengshun

* * * * *

So to summarize, they decided that the [CC BY
NC](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/) license was more
appropriate to their journal. Personally I am a big fan of not including
the non-commercial clause, but I certainly understand why they do so,
and the most important thing is that they choose the CC license that is
appropriate to them, and then use that consistently throughout the
journal.

The other issue was that it was not clear from just viewing the
individual articles, that they had been licensed with an open license.
It seems that the publisher will now change that, something that is very
positive.

There are many other journals out there that do the same thing, but this
is one positive move from e-Century Publishing. I appreciate their
interest and understanding, and wish them best of luck with their
journals.

Stian
