---
title: New Peer2Peer University Courses!
created_at: Mon, 30 Aug 2010 23:47:58 +0000
kind: article
tags: academia/research, Education, open-education, p2pU, plenk2010
---

There is so much exciting going on at [P2PU](http://p2pu.org), that if I
hadn't been moving tomorrow, and if my MA thesis was not due in a week,
I could have written many long posts. For now, I wanted to make a quick
list of all the new courses - there is an official course listing page,
but it's a bit unwieldy at the moment (we're working on it). So far
there are 30 amazing courses offered, more than twice of what we had
during the last cycle. In addition to the 18 "normal" courses, we also
have 12 courses that are part of the exciting new [School of Webcraft
initiative](http://www.drumbeat.org/p2pu-webcraft/about), in
collaboration with Mozilla Foundation.

Below I have listed all the new courses, with the title, and a
tweet-sized introduction.

* * * * *

**General courses**

**[Adopting Open
Textbooks](http://p2pu.org/general/adopting-open-textbooks)** Can
adopting open educational resources make education more accessible to
learners and empower educators to share?

**[Athletics: Our Food For
Life](http://p2pu.org/general/athletics-our-food-life)** The course
focuses on athletics as a platform for improved health, skill
development, physiological & psychological athletic efficiency

**[Collaborative Lesson
Planning](http://p2pu.org/general/collaborative-lesson-planning)** Can
publishing and collaboratively building lesson plans online make them
better?

**[Consciousness: Games and
Apps](http://p2pu.org/general/consciousness-games-and-apps)**
Hypothesis: Internet use changes consciousness. How can we develop games
and apps that change consciousness faster, and enhance evolution?

**[Copyright 4 Educators
AUS](http://p2pu.org/general/copyright-4-educators-aus)** A course for
educators in Australia who want to learn about copyright, open content
material and licensing.

**[Copyright 4 Educators
US](http://p2pu.org/general/copyright-4-educators-us)** A course for
educators in the US who want to learn about copyright, open content
material and licensing.

**[Copyright 4 Educators
ZA](http://p2pu.org/general/copyright-4-educators-za)** A course for
educators in South Africa who want to learn about copyright, open
content material and licensing.

**[Creative Programming
2010](http://p2pu.org/general/creative-programming-2010)** Welcome to
the fun side of computer programming, a powerful tool for creativity

**[DIY Math](http://p2pu.org/general/diy-math)** This course is designed
to build independent study and peer-support skills for mathematics
learners at all levels.

**[Human Trafficking](http://p2pu.org/general/human-trafficking)**
Different manifestations of trafficking in human beings with a special
emphasis on trafficked women and children through real life examples.

**[Inteligência Coletiva e
AVA](http://p2pu.org/general/intelig%C3%AAncia-coletiva-e-ava)** Como
potencializar a inteligência coletiva em ambientes virtuais de
aprendizagem

**[Introduction To
Finance](http://p2pu.org/general/introduction-finance)** This course
will cover basic finance and economic topics.

**[Managing Election
Campaigns](http://p2pu.org/general/managing-election-campaigns)** How to
Win An Election with \$2.00 and a pint of Cooking Oil

**[Open Creative
Nonfiction](http://p2pu.org/general/open-creative-nonfiction)** To what
extent is it possible to capture the self in narrative? How do physical
spaces affect that story?

**[Open Governance](http://p2pu.org/general/open-governance)** How can
open communities of volunteers like P2PU make good decisions and get
stuff done?

**[Open Journalism & the Open
Web](http://p2pu.org/general/open-journalism-open-web)** Can hacks and
hackers work together in the new online news world?

**[Social Innovation in
Education](http://p2pu.org/general/social-innovation-education)** What
are your innate "megaskills" for social innovation in education?

**[The Praxis of Queer
Pedagogy](http://p2pu.org/general/praxis-queer-pedagogy)** Looking to
find ways to rethink your practice as an educator? Find out what "queer"
and "pedagogy" have to offer you.

**Webcraft courses**

**[Beginning Python
Webservices](http://p2pu.org/webcraft/beginning-python-webservices)**
Want to learn about the protocol that runs the web HTTP and how to make
web services with Python?

**[Designers Tackling the
Web](http://p2pu.org/webcraft/designers-tackling-web)** You're a smokin'
designer... but web pages, how do they work? Tackle the Web. Learn basic
HTML and CSS

**[Drupal Social Web
Application](http://p2pu.org/webcraft/drupal-social-web-application)**
Learn to use Drupal to build a social web app that lets users
collaborate on projects and ideas.

**[HTML5](http://p2pu.org/webcraft/html5)** Is HTML5 more than "just
HTML" and can I actually use it to create a website today?

**[Programming Visual
Media](http://p2pu.org/webcraft/programming-visual-media)** Can you
learn to code the same way you learned to paint? Intro to programming,
studio-style.

**[Reading Code](http://p2pu.org/webcraft/reading-code)** Get
comfortable reading other peoples' code, from big open source projects
to small standalone apps.

**[Scripting 101](http://p2pu.org/webcraft/scripting-101)** Web Monkeys
or command line junkies, join, learn to hack and make a better world!

**[UX: Design para a
Educação](http://p2pu.org/webcraft/ux-design-para-educa%C3%A7%C3%A3o)**
Queres aprender a desenvolver ambientes de experiência de usuário a
serem aplicados a vários sistemas?

**[UX: Designing for
Education](http://p2pu.org/webcraft/ux-designing-education)** Are you
motivated to develop user experience designs that can be applied to
various systems?

**[Web 200: Anatomy of a
Request](http://p2pu.org/webcraft/web-200-anatomy-request)** What
happens when you click go in the browser? Find out in "Web 200: Anatomy
of a Request"

**[Web Accessibility](http://p2pu.org/webcraft/web-accessibility)**
Maximize your audience through inclusion and non-discrimination by using
accessible design.

**[Web Development
101](http://p2pu.org/webcraft/web-development-101-community)** How are
webpages made and have you ever wondered how to create your own?

* * * * *

*There should be something for everyone, so find a course that looks
interesting, read up on the course design and curriculum, and sign up!
The deadline for sign-up is the 8th of September, and I think courses
will begin running on the 15th of September for six weeks.*

Stian
