---
title: "The Chinese Top Level Courses Project: Conclusion and directions for further research"
created_at: Thu, 09 Dec 2010 14:55:38 +0000
kind: article
tags:
  - academia/research
  - china
  - Education
  - MA thesis
  - open-education
  - p2pU
  - The Top Level Courses Project
---

In this thesis, I set out to understand how the Top Level Courses
Project was organized, and how it came to be. I wanted to compare it
with MIT OpenCourseWare, and understand whether MIT’s project had
influenced the development of the Top Level Courses Project in any way.
I also discussed whether the spread of the OpenCourseWare concept could
be seen as a sign of growing isomorphism in values among institutions of
higher education in the world, and I proposed the counter-theory that
what was happening was a borrowing of ideas or concepts in name only,
that were implemented in quite different ways.

In chapter three, I showed how concepts of course teams, and improvable
courses developed by groups over many years arose, and how the tradition
of course evaluations followed immediately after the centralized
curriculum began to be opened up. This came together with the
unprecedented expansion of Chinese higher education in the last 15
years, and the strong focus on investing in excellent examples – first
universities, then disciplines, and finally courses – chosen through
peer-review. Taken together with the focus on IT in education, this made
the creation of the Top Level Courses Project a natural next step, but
it is possible that some of the impetus came from knowledge of the MIT
project.

I have described in detail how the project is organized, and how it is
experienced by university administrators and participating professors. I
used this in chapter six to show that the project was fundamentally
different from MIT’s OpenCourseWare, although there were a few areas
that overlapped. I discussed the differences between the two projects
using the framework of the four purposes, suggested in chapter two, as
well as by conceptualizing MIT OpenCourseWare as a norm, and as a policy
innovation.

I then showed how the Top Level Courses Project has been fundamentally
misunderstood in the West as a direct continuation of the MIT model, and
used theories from policy borrowing, and case studies from other Asian
countries, to show how this could have happened. Finally, in the
conclusion, I proposed that the history of Chinese higher education
discussed in chapter two has led to a model of course development that
is fundamentally different from the North American model, as a reason
why this project could not easily be transferred to a North American
university, but also suggest that this situations might be changing.

**Directions for future research**

This thesis has given a detailed account of how the Top Level Courses
Project is organized, and what purposes it is intended to serve. I have
not made any attempt to evaluate whether the project is successful in
attaining any of these goals. Although there have been criticisms of the
project raised in the Chinese literature, and some evaluation performed,
there is a great need for rigorously designed studies designed to test
some of the central assumptions. I believe that the four purposes
introduced in chapter two could help in that process. As it is, several
papers have attempted to evaluate the project without first specifying
which purpose it believed the program served.

One could design an experiment to measure the impact of teachers who go
through the process of having their courses selected as Top Level
Courses, and the entire department. Do they become better teachers? Do
the courses improve? Does it have an inspirational effect on the entire
department? Further, one could look at professors at other institutions
who consult material from courses similar to their own. Does it inspire
them to improve their own courses, or do they acquire new ideas and
content that they can use in their teaching?

It is also possible to look at student use of the resources, and whether
they are able to learn effectively, but it should be kept in mind that
this was never one of the main purposes of the project (although it
seems to have become slightly more prioritized as the project develops).

There is also a wide-open space for comparative educators and higher
education specialists within the open education research sphere.
Currently, most of the research is conducted by educational
technologists, but there are many very fruitful venues for comparative
and historical studies. This thesis has been an attempt at using Chinese
higher education history and current context to explain the development
of an Open Educational Resources project that ended up very differently
from the global OpenCourseWare model.

Another approach would be to use these open materials as data in a
comparative curriculum project. There are a few examples of this from
China, where China Open Resources for Education facilitated 148
comparative studies comparing MIT curriculum with the curriculum at
Chinese universities (CORE 2007).

Two specific examples are Li et al. (2007), who conducted a narrow study
of 14 Top Level biology courses and 22 MIT OpenCourseWare biology
courses, and found that Top Level Courses are largely based on
unidirectional classroom instruction, whereas MIT courses emphasize
student interaction. And Liu Kefu (2006) used OpenCourseWare to do a
comparative study of classics courses in the United States. Given the
wide variety of materials available, this could fruitfully be extended
to other areas.

* * * * *

The quotes in this text is from the MA Thesis "The Chinese National Top
Level Courses Project: Using Open Educational Resources to Promote
Quality in Undergraduate Teaching" by Stian Håklev, University of
Toronto 2010.

-   Download this thesis:
  [PDF](http://reganmian.net/top-level-courses/Haklev_Stian_201009_MA_thesis.pdf)[DOC](http://reganmian.net/top-level-courses/Haklev_Stian_201009_MA_thesis.doc)
  [ODT](http://reganmian.net/top-level-courses/Haklev_Stian_201009_MA_thesis.odt)
  [RTF](http://reganmian.net/top-level-courses/Haklev_Stian_201009_MA_thesis.rtf)[ePub](http://reganmian.net/top-level-courses/top-level-courses.epub)
  [Mobi
  (Kindle)](http://reganmian.net/top-level-courses/top-level-courses.mobi)
-   [Central page collecting all blog posts, many different download
  formats, and supplementary
  material](http://reganmian.net/top-level-courses)

* * * * *
