---
title: P2PU Future Scenario on Collaboration
created_at: Tue, 05 Apr 2011 20:54:06 +0000
kind: article
tags:
- academia/research
- Education
- open-education
- p2pU
---

This term, I took a [Knowledge Media and Design
Institute](http://www.kmdi.utoronto.ca/graduate-study/courses#KMD1002)
class on values and design. Part of the class was a group assignment
that had us choose a public venue, and do unobtrusive participant
observation (this could be a public square, a museum or another place
where people congregate). Based on what we found through our
ethnographic ministudy, and the readings and ideas from the class, we
would come up with a design intervention to further a certain value. My
group chose the value of "collaboration", and used [Peer2Peer
University](http://p2pu.org) as the "venue".

We were able to do the study in P2PU, because all interactions are
archived publicly - the ethics approval for the class would not have
allowed us to do research on a class that was protected by password. For
me, it was fun having a group of people with a lot of ideas around
design and knowledge media, but who did not know much about P2PU. Of
course, this was a small project in one class, so it cannot be seen as a
full-scale research project, more to get your feet wet with ethnography
and design, but it was still a lot of fun, and hopefully could inspire
further work.

The group visited several current and archived P2PU courses (here's [an
example "notification"](http://p2pu.org/general/node/15762/forums/27297)
that I posted in one of the courses to let them know that we were having
a peek). We did not do any rigorous analysis of the data gathered, but
from the notes that the group members took, their feeling was that
course organizers were trying very hard to promote collaboration and
peer-learning, but that participants did not take enough cognitive
responsibility, which led to conversations that were very course
organizer-centric.

We discussed many possible reasons for this, and brainstormed ways of
improving this state of affairs. We came up with a number of ideas, like
designing some kind of an "orientation" for new participants, to let
them understand better the P2PU principles. In the end though, we wanted
to create a design intervention. Based on the readings from class, we
thought that perhaps the linear design of the discussion forums, which
lead to good ideas being "buried", could be a factor hindering deeper
engagement from the students.

To demonstrate our idea, we were asked to create a "future scenario"
video. Creating a video always takes much longer than you think, but it
was a fun assignment, and we were lucky to have a very photogenic
"protagonist".

We also wrote [a small
paper](http://reganmian.net/files/KMD1002%20Final%20-%20Collaboration%20at%20P2PU.pdf)
describing some of the literature we consulted, and our thinking around
the video.

I am very interested in the theory around visual representations of
discourse in online learning. I will be [giving a talk about
this](http://cck11.mooc.ca/week12.htm) tomorrow (Wednesday, April 5th,
2011) at the CCK11 course. It will also be an important component of the
[P2PU course on Computer Supported Collaborative
Learning](http://new.p2pu.org/en-US/courses/introduction-to-the-field-of-computer-supported-co/content/full-description/)
which I will co-organize on P2PU starting later this month.

Thanks to [Arlo](http://www.facebook.com/people/Arlo-Murphy/1538269837),
[Rebecca](http://www.linkedin.com/pub/rebecca-michaels/25/884/501) and
[Eleonore](http://www.linkedin.com/pub/eleonore-fournier-tombs/15/1a9/25)
for a fun collaborative project.

Stian
