---
title: "Interview with CICIStudy: Chinese portal for OpenCourseWare courses"
created_at: Mon, 03 Jan 2011 20:28:51 +0000
kind: article
tags:
- academia/research
- china
- Education
- open access
- open-education
- p2pU
- plenk2010
- tech
- The Top Level Courses Project
---

[![](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/taoke-300x185.png "taoke")](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/taoke.png)I
first became aware of the explosion in interest around foreign open
courses in China when I was asked for an interview by a Chinese reporter
writing about this phenomenon ([interview in
Chinese](http://reganmian.net/boke/2010/12/22/%e6%9b%be%e7%bb%8f%e9%80%83%e8%af%be%e7%9a%84%e4%bd%a0%ef%bc%8c%e4%bb%8a%e5%a4%a9%e6%b7%98%e8%af%be%e4%ba%86%e5%90%97%ef%bc%9f/)).
Instead of the traditional 开放式课程 (kaifangshi kecheng) - quite a
literal translation of "open courses / open courseware", the new term
being used is 公开课 (public / open courses).

*A little linguistic aside: Here is what the [ABC Chinese
Dictionary](http://uhpress.wordpress.com/books-in-series/abc-chinese-dictionary-series/)
says about kaifang: "1) come into bloom 2) lift a ban/etc. 3) open to
traffic or public use; open to the world 4) be turned on, be in
operation 5) hand over a government monopoly to private operations". For
gongkai: "V. make public; make known to the public. S.V. open; overt;
public".*

--- ---
[![](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/photo2-200x300.png "photo(2)")](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/photo2.png)   [![](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/photo-200x300.png "photo")](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/photo.png)
--- ---

*In addition to the above, my initial associations with the two words
above (as a non-native speaker) is the following: kaifang was used a lot
for the liberalization and reform movement in the 1980's and going
forwards. It can also be used about people to mean that they are
liberal, even loose, or "open minded". It has traditionally been used
for open in OER, open source, open courseware, etc. Seeing the
dictionary definitions above, it is something that "has been opened" as
a conscious act, by someone. Gongkai to me seems to reflect something
that is "public", almost by its nature, where access to it is almost a
right.*

Either way, there is now a very strong public interest in these courses,
with this new catchy name, and a number of website portals have been
created, which feature the video lectures from Yale, Stanford, MIT, etc.

[![](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/cicistudy-300x199.png "cicistudy")](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/cicistudy.png)While
browsing, I came across [**CICIStudy**](http://cicistudy.com), and found
it to be a site with very clean design, and nice functionality. I was
very curious as to who had started it, what their purpose was, etc., and
sent an interview to the e-mail listed on their website asking for an
interview - which they graciously granted.

I found their take on the developing interest in open courses in China
to be very interesting, and I wish them the best of luck in the future!

*(The original interview was conducted in Chinese, and [the full text is
available](http://reganmian.net/boke/2011/01/03/%e9%99%b6%e8%af%be%e5%85%88%e9%94%8b_%e9%87%87%e8%ae%bfcici/).
I did the translation, and CICIStudy has not had a chance to review it
for accuracy. Since the term gongkaike does not differentiate between
OpenCourseWare and other open course projects, I have translated it as
"open courses" below.)*

* * * * *

**1. Who are you? What is your background? What kind of an organization
is CICIStudy? Is it a part of a larger company, or a company that was
just started for this purpose? Or are you just doing it as a group?**
Currently our group is not part of any company, and we have not created
a company ourselves, everything is in the beginning phase. But this
doesn’t mean that it is difficult for us to create an excellent service,
the members of the group have backgrounds from large companies such as
Microsoft, and are extremely familiar with web development, which
guarantees that we are able to effectively develop CICIStudy.

**2. How did you first hear about, or get interested in open courses
courses? Why do you think they are useful and important to Chinese
students?**
[![](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/mitocw-300x202.png "mitocw")](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/mitocw.png)At
the beginning of 2010, I had only barely heard about open courses, and
watched a few course recordings. I though it was great, but didn’t pay
that much attention. I had no idea that the phenomenon of open courses
had grown so large in other countries. In April, I happened to watch a
news report about open courses, and suddenly realized the importance of
providing a local platform for these resources. That evening, I began to
seek out resources, and plan the development of CICIStudy.

Three days later, I began seriously planning and designing the site.
After launching the site, I began to understand open courses more in
depth. Whether these courses are transmitting knowledge, or spreading
moral values, they touch people profoundly.

So far, these courses have not been able to have a large impact on
Chinese students – they might watch a lecture after they are finished
repeating homework, going to class, and all the other activities of a
university student.

However, the courses are still very important – being able to provide
access to wisdom for students who seek it is already of extraordinary
value. And the real value created is not just limited to students – from
the feedback we have received to the site, we know that 60 year olds are
equally interested in the courses.

**3. What is the goal of CICIStudy? What kind of functionality do you
provide?** What CICIStudy wants to provide is a stream of information
that contains condensed wisdom. The goal of the platform is for people
to be able to very easily receive high quality education (unequal
distribution of educational resources has always been a problem). At the
same time, learners should be able to receive guidance and communicate
with other learners, so that the learning becomes truly participatory,
and not just limited to downloading and viewing.

This means that for CICIStudy, how to enable everyone to learn more
effectively becomes the key question, and the development of all
features must be centred around this goal. Also, we are not at all
restricted to only offering open course resources, even if open courses
are currently the best, and most attractive resources available, which
is why we chose to present them as the main feature.

**4. Lately, Chinese white-collar workers have taken an explosive
interest in open courses, why? Open courses have existed since 2003, why
is it only now that so many people in China became interested in them?**
I think it all began with some subtitling groups, which about half a
year ago began to subtitle videos from Yale and other universities, on
their own initiative. Since this had removed the language barrier that
prevented Chinese net users from accessing the videos, and given the
wide renown of the universities involved, this led to much interest, and
extremely high download/view numbers from video sharing sites. This in
turn led to the first newspaper article, which began a continuous stream
of news coverage, only serving to increase the general interest in these
videos.

In 2003, these special conditions did not exist. The scale and reach of
subtitling groups was still very small, and video sharing sites and
community portals were also in the very beginning of their development
trajectory. At that time, there wasn’t the level of reflection around
educational issues as there is today, and finally, the media was not as
interested at that time, as they are today. All of these factors, as
well as other direct and indirect factors, led the open course
phenomenon to explode this year – it wasn’t random.

**5. There are other websites that do very similar things to you, for
example NetEase Open Courses. What is special about your site, how can
you compete with these other sites?**
[![](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/wangyi-300x144.png "wangyi")](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/wangyi.png)The
NetEase Open Courses site is a part of the NetEase video site.
Currently, they are focusing on how to overcome the linguistic
obstacles, by hiring translation agencies to subtitle videos. CICIStudy
is more concerned about becoming a platform that enables learning.
Displaying the videos to the users is fulfilling one step of sharing
open resources, but it’s not enough. It would be irresponsible to ignore
the need for learner initiative and enthusiasm during the learning
process.

We hope that the platform will enable us to explore and research
effective ways of enabling all students interested in acquiring more
knowledge to do so effectively with rich communication and
collaboration. On one hand, virtualizing the traditional classroom with
it’s socratic interactions provides an atmosphere of deep thought and
reflection, on the other hand. On the other hand, utilizing the web’s
potential for rich media and immediacy enables us to amplify the
advantages of traditional distance education.

Currently, we are still very far from achieving our goal, but whether we
will be successful or not, this kind of research is still very valuable.

**6. What is your business model? Will you let people pay for accessing
courses in the future?** Open Courses are based around Creative Commons
licenses, and so far the materials I have seen all require sharing to be
in a non-commercial situation. How to find an effective business model
in such a situation is still a paradox. We would like to be able to
consult with the rights owners to ease the situation a bit, so that we
could keep the site running. Of course, if there were foundations or
other organizations that could provide financial support, that would be
of huge help, but currently we don’t have any leads in this field.

One thing that is certain, is that there will never be a situation where
people need to pay to be able to access resources on our site, they will
always be freely available to anyone who are interested. Even if we
acquired materials that we owned the copyright to, we would not close
off access – that would go against our initial principles.

**7. Foreign open courses use open licenses, so using them is not
“piracy”. Is that important to you? How do you make sure that your
website respects the requirements of these licenses?** You are right,
this is very important to us, we really hope that we are respecting the
licenses properly. We show the CC logo and the fact that this resource
is licensed under a CC-license on every video page, but there might
still be some oversights.

From my personal point of view, the understanding of CC licenses in
China is still very weak. We are still in the phase of stressing the
importance of copyright protection, and the concept of the creative
commons has not gotten wide recognition yet. People have not yet
reflected much about the meaning of knowledge sharing, and abuses of
open licenses.

**8. What do you think about the Chinese National Top Level Courses
Project? Are there excellent resources there as well? Will you consider
including resources from Top Level Courses on your website in the
future?**
[![](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/jingpinke-300x202.png "jingpinke")](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/jingpinke.png)It’s
very difficult for me to give an accurate assessment of the Top Level
Courses, since I have not reviewed these resources systematically,
although I am sure that the courses contain many excellent resources. I
have never participated in the production of Top Level Courses at
university-level, but I helped out as a student in the production of
video courses at my high school. The teachers who were delivering the
video lectures would spend a lot of time preparing, beginning almost a
month before the lecture took place, and they made sure to use
multimedia appropriately.

This left a deep impression on me, at that time I even created a Flash
website as assist in the learning. The Top Level Courses Project
probably also has a lot of really great websites that promote
interaction. However, when I went to the main portal site, I only saw a
point-based system for downloading resources, which limits the
distribution of these resources.

In the future, if the licensing problem gets resolved, I hope that we
can put these resources on our website and make them available to all of
our users. There are many great lecturers in China, and their Top Level
Courses can be great for learning. It’s a real shame that we are
currently unable to share these courses.

**9. What is your future development plan for your platform, and group?
New features, contents, services?** The development of CICIStudy has
already reached milestone number 3, and between the 10th and 15th of
January, we will release new functionality to the site. This will
include taking course notes, and rating these among users, collaborative
translation, search functionality, better organization of the lecture
videos, etc. We are currently exploring and researching better and
richer ways of studying.

*Thank you very much to CICIStudy for generously agreeing to this
interview, and for providing Chinese learners with more opportunities.*
