---
title: Etherpad + small groups in Skype, a new way of doing P2PU meetings
created_at: Mon, 23 May 2011 12:13:11 +0000
kind: article
tags: CSCL-intro, open-education, p2pU, tech
---

**Introduction**

P2PU courses typically consist of an asynchronous and a synchronous
part. The asynchronous part is all the work that is done throughout the
week, reading articles, posting blog posts, or comments on the site,
collaborating on a wiki article, etc. The synchronous part is usually
the "mass-meeting", where all the participants who are able to make it,
"meet" at a common time. I wrote a short paper for a course last year
about the different elements of synchronous communications, and I tried
to extract the most relevant ideas on [a wiki
page](http://reganmian.net/wiki/Synchronous_meetings).

There I listed the following "uses" of synchronous meetings at P2PU:

-   can be very important for social cohesion, and motivation
  -   making participants feel closer to the group
  -   generating a greater feeling of shared responsibility than is
      easily possible through asynchronous communications

-   pace-setter in the course, through having weekly tasks that have to
  be performed before the synchronous meeting at a set time, because
  participants are expected to present or discuss certain topics.
-   showcase of projects that individual students or small groups of
  students have undertaken.
-   virtual office hours, where students are able to directly get
  feedback and ask for help on problems that they are stuck on, both
  from the course organizer, and for the other participants.
-   an opportunity to take stock of the conversation so far, and have
  the community converge around key ideas, and generate a shared
  understanding of the state of knowledge in the community, to enable
  moving forwards as a group.
-   can be very powerful for collaborative knowledge building around
  artefacts, see below the discussion about the interaction between
  synchronous tools and artefacts.

In a recent P2PU course that I took at OISE, I definitively felt the
lack of any weekly meeting (this course was purely asynchronous, you
were expected to log into a discussion forum several times per week,
read what had been written, and post new notes). Not only did I never
have a chance to hear the voices or talk directly with the others in the
class (except for the teacher, who posted brief weekly video summaries),
but it also made it harder to "keep up" with the course. That is what I
meant by "pace-setter" above... If you are a busy student, with a number
of courses and other projects, you often live by your calendar, and when
a lecture is coming up, you know that you need to do the readings and
prepare. But it is easy for a course that doesn't appear in the calendar
at all to be forgotten or ignored.

**Technology and pedagogy**

Given the use of synchronous meetings though, there are two key
questions to be answered **"technology and pedagogy".**Not only what
tools you will use, but also how you will organize the meeting to be
most useful to whatever purpose you prioritize. There are quite a lot of
writings on how to conduct effective classroom lectures, tools for
energizing the students, etc., but I have not seen anything on how to
conduct a useful discussion group in Elluminate, for example. (I'd love
to hear about it, if it exists).

As for the technology to use during this "mass-meeting", previous course
organizers have tried a number of approaches, from Skype group calls, to
Tokbox, conference calls, etc. And we not only use these tools for
course meetings, there are also many organizational meetings at P2PU,
whether the weekly community call or smaller group meetings. Personally
I find large group calls on Skype or conference call quite tiresome. The
audio quality is never great (on conference call, it's uniformly poor,
on Skype, there will always be one person with problems), Skype keeps
kicking people out, everyone either starts talking at once, or are all
silent, etc. You leave such a meeting feeling exhaustion, rather than
the exhilaration that can come from a great conversation.

I was excited about P2PU getting access to Big Blue Button, because I
have had a few work meetings with Elluminate, which worked quite well,
given that we could more easily see who was talking, share screens etc.
However, the first attempts of using BBB with our \#CSCLintro course was
not a great success. BBB has much poorer echo-cancellation than Skype
and other commercial tools, and if not every single group member uses
headphones, there will be constant disruption. (And somehow, there will
never be a group where everyone manages to remember headphones :)). It
is possible to mute and unmute members, but in the end, this was so
tiresome, that we ended up migrating naturally to Etherpad.

[![](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2011/05/Screen-shot-2011-05-23-at-8.07.51-PM.png "Screen shot 2011-05-23 at 8.07.51 PM")](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2011/05/Screen-shot-2011-05-23-at-8.07.51-PM.png)

Etherpad has a chat window, together with a large collaborative editing
window. This is a nice combination - you can discuss in the chat, while
you work out things together in the editing window. Since the editing
window is synchronous, and everyone gets a different color, sometimes
the chat migrates directly into the document. We used that for two group
meetings which I was unable to participate in, and reading the
transcripts (Etherpad also let's you "play back" the creation of the
document, but unfortunately, not synchronized with the chat messages),
it was a very lively meeting.

Sometimes people are concerned with things getting out of hand, and two
many conversation threads going on at the same time, as well as typing
being slower than thinking (although with a lot of people, you can get
more said with text than with voice, because only one can talk at the
same time, and we read far faster than we listen), but overall it was
quite nice.

Another benefit of text chat is that it is much easier to review later,
and even analyze. Nate Otto did [a great
visualization](http://ottonomy.net/temp/cscl-intro/interactive-chatlog-wk3.html)
of how different topics weaved in and out of our conversation.

**Idea: Etherpad + Skype**

However, I didn't want to give up on voice conversation. I had a few
Skype calls with my co-organizer Monica this spring, which have been
amazingly productive - really entering a "state of flow", building on
each other's ideas, to the extent that I began recording them, to not
loose any of it. I wanted to share that intellectual excitement with the
participants in the course, and also the personal connection which comes
from that more direct communication. I realized that I really like
one-on-one conversations, and also that I had almost never had any
problems getting Skype to work for calls with only one other person -
it's with group-calls that things get difficult.

So we had the idea of combining these aspects. We had everyone join the
Etherpad at the allotted time, and asked them to write down in the pad
their Skype names, and also which of the two articles of the week they
had read (ideally everyone would have read both, but reality is not
perfect). We then randomly paired people up with each other, who had
read the same article, and gave them ten (extended to 15) minutes to
discuss the articles. They were free to discuss any issues that they had
come up with, but were also referred to the guiding questions that
Monica had prepared.

**How did it go?**

In a word, great. One interesting aspect of this, is that course
organizers do not get to hear what happens in all the other
conversations, so we just have to ask people how they went. I had a very
interesting conversation with [Joe Corneli](http://metameso.org/~joe/)
and got some great new ideas, and from what I heard, the other members
really liked it too. We asked people to take notes in [the
Etherpad](http://pad.p2pu.org/cscl), and provided a simple structure (1
realization, 1 unresolved question and 1 idea) for what we wanted to
hear.

Unfortunately, the meeting got quite truncated because of some confusion
about when we were starting, and people having to leave early, so we
didn't have a lot of time to discuss in the group what had been shared
in the pairs. In the future, it would be interesting to think of other
designs, for example I'd love to first talk to one person for 10
minutes, and then another one for 10 minutes. That way you get to talk
to more people, and you can bring ideas from the first conversation into
the second one. We could also have people who have read different
articles talk, so that they can share what they have read with each
other, etc.

Of course, there is nothing stopping people from making appointments to
calling each other up at any time during the week, and some courses have
tried to make this a regular feature, like the first course on creative
non-fiction, where people where supposed to team up during the week to
critique each other's writings. However, this is very difficult to
schedule, and you lack the flexibility of being able to switch between
different people, bring it back to the big group, etc.

Would love to hear from others who try this, refine the concept, or have
other great ways of conducting synchronous online meetings or study
groups!

Stian
