---
title: Two articles about Chinese open courses published
created_at: Wed, 08 Feb 2012 18:15:07 +0000
kind: article
tags: academia/research, china, MA thesis, The Top Level Courses Project
---

I
[released](http://reganmian.net/blog/2010/09/13/ma-thesis-on-open-educational-resources-in-china-released-watch-it-fly/)
my [MA thesis](http://reganmian.net/top-level-courses) about Chinese
Open Courses September 13, 2010, and more than a year later, two journal
articles partly based on the thesis have also appeared, one in English
and one in Chinese.

**British Journal of Educational Technology**

![](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/Screen-Shot-2012-02-08-at-07.59.34.png "Screen Shot 2012-02-08 at 07.59.34")[The
English article](http://reganmian.net/files/practical-model.pdf)
appeared in [British Journal of Educational
Technology](http://www.blackwellpublishing.com/journal.asp?ref=0007-1013) as
["Online
First"](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/journal/10.1111/(ISSN)1467-8535/earlyview) in
November 2011. Judging by the backlog, it might not make it into the
actual journal for another year, however since it's available online, I
count it as "published".

This article was a very long time in the making, a process which began a
year before my MA thesis was completed. It is based on a paper which
[Wang Long](http://www.core.org.cn/cn/teacher/teacher_35500.html) wrote
for [International Review of Research on Open and Distance
Learning](http://www.irrodl.org/) (IRRODL). Wang Long works at the
[Chinese People's Public Security
University](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_People's_Public_Security_University),
and I had seen his name on a number of articles about Chinese Top Level
Courses, so when I was in Beijing, I contacted him. It was quite funny,
as I was standing outside the ports of the university waiting for him.
He called me on his cellphone asking me where I was, and I said "right
here". It turns out that he didn't expect me to be a foreigner, and I
didn't expect him to be dressed in a police uniform.

![](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/20-100H3140K80-L-lp.jpg "20-100H3140K80-L-lp")

I was very impressed by Wang Long as a person with a real passion for
OER, who has pursued his research for many years, often without funding
or external support. He told me that IRRODL had told him his paper was
very interesting, but the English was not good enough, and asked if I
would be willing to work with him to improve it.

It turned out that it wasn't only the English which needed editing, the
article itself was written in a way that would have been very foreign to
non-Chinese readers. Thus began a two-year process of collaborating on
improving the article. The article flew between Toronto and Beijing,
with long emails about changes and discussions of sources. We decided to
target the British Journal of Educational Technology (which even has a
[corresponding editor in
China](http://www.wiley.com/bw/editors.asp?ref=0007-1013&site=1)), and
submitted the first draft in December 2010.

We got positive feedback, but lot's of comments, and spent about three
months addressing these. At that point, my MA thesis had already been
published, and I was able to incorporate interview data and references
from that as well. The second draft was submitted, more comments, and
finally the third draft was fully accepted. [Official
version](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8535.2011.01254.x/full),
[PDF](http://reganmian.net/files/practical-model.pdf).

**Open Education Research Journal (Chinese)**

![](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/Screen-Shot-2012-02-08-at-12.37.15.png)After
[having my thesis translated into
Chinese](http://reganmian.net/blog/2011/06/01/chinese-translation-of-ma-thesis-on-top-level-courses-available/) ([PDF](http://reganmian.net/top-level-courses/Jingpinkecheng-Haklev-zh.pdf)),
I also wanted to turn it into a journal article in a Chinese journal.
Again I worked with Wang Long, who too a first stab of shortening the
thesis to a journal article. We collaborated closely on highlighting the
aspects I thought would be the most interesting for a Chinese audience,
and making it into a coherent whole (something that would have been
almost impossible for me without his help).

We finally had the article accepted by
[开放教育研究杂志](http://openedu.shtvu.org.cn/frontsite/index.asp)
(Open Education Research Journal), hosted at Shanghai TV University,
which has published a long series of articles about China Top Level
Courses and foreign OER projects. The article came out in January, and
is currently available online. [Official
version](http://openedu.shtvu.org.cn/frontsite/series_details.asp?id=1405),
[PDF](http://reganmian.net/files/kaifangjiaoyuyanjiu2012.pdf).

I am still planning one more journal publication from the thesis (which
I should have gotten out a long time ago), but I am quite happy with
these two publications, and especially happy for the great collaboration
with Wang Long. I think this way of helping each other getting published
in "each others" languages is a great model that could be useful to
others as well.

Stian
