---
title: Search 40+ edutech wikis
created_at: 2012-06-08 00:00:00 -0400
kind: article
tags:
- academia/research
- Education
- Researchr
- tech
---

[![](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2012/06/edutech-logos1.jpg "edutech logos")](http://reganmian.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2012/06/edutech-logos1.jpg)

Did you know that there are more than 40 educational technology wikis
out there? Of course, Wikipedia can be a good starting source, to look
up concepts such as
[constructivism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constructivism_(learning_theory))
or [cognitive
psychology](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cognitive_psychology), but
sometimes you want a more specialized source, and one that isn't
constrained by Wikipedia's community norms (in academia, point of view
isn't always such a bad thing).

I was first excited to come across
[EduTechWiki](http://edutechwiki.unige.ch/en/Main_Page), hosted at
[TECFA](http://tecfa.unige.ch/) in Geneva, checking out articles about
[learner autonomy](http://edutechwiki.unige.ch/en/Learner_autonomy) or
something as specific as the [ArgueGraph
script](http://edutechwiki.unige.ch/en/ArgueGraph_Script) (a very
comprehensive article, which probably would have been speedy-deleted
from Wikipedia for lack of
"[notability](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Notability)").
However, as I kept exploring, I realized there's actually a huge amount
of educational technology wikis out there. I began collecting these on a
[wikipage](http://reganmian.net/wiki/edutech_wikis), using the
[webclipping
functionality](http://reganmian.net/blog/2012/05/10/using-web-clipping-and-sidewiki-to-gather-and-synthesize-information/ "Using web clipping and sidewiki to gather and synthesize information").

From these wikis, we can find articles about topics as different
as [technology and education in Western
history](http://www.studyplace.org/wiki/A-HH4078),
[storyboarding](http://www.instructionaldesign.org/storyboarding.html),
[epistemic
affordance](http://www.tel-thesaurus.net/wiki/index.php/Epistemic_affordance),
[knowledge
components](http://www.learnlab.org/research/wiki/index.php/Knowledge_components),
[cognitive neuroscience
discoveries](http://iae-pedia.org/Cognitive_Neuroscience_Discoveries),
[multiple intelligences](http://www.infed.org/thinkers/gardner.htm), and
a whole lote more (all of the links are from different wikis). Of
course, one has to wonder if there aren't ways of better harnessing all
of this great information and analysis, which is scattered around on
multiple sites (some more or less abandoned, and probably not frequently
visited). I have thought a lot about having all the citations on such
wikis be semantic, enabling you to quickly display which pages have
cited a certain article, etc.

However, for now, I came up with a much more "brute force" approach,
which nevertheless works pretty well. Google allows you to create a
[Custom Search Engine](http://www.google.com/cse/), which accepts a list
of URL patterns to search, and which can be embedded anywhere. I
extracted the root URLs from all the wikis [I have
listed](http://reganmian.net/wiki/edutech_wikis), and added the [four
Researchr wikis](http://reganmian.net/wiki/individual_academic_wikis)
(all of which are roughly about edutech topics), as well as [the Encore
Wiki](http://encorewiki.org) which contains notes from many of the
members of [my lab](http://encorelab.org), and some relevant University
of Toronto courses. You can try the result below, I've also embedded
this search in my [wiki page listing edutech
wikis](http://reganmian.net/wiki/edutech_wikis), and if you view source,
you can easily copy the code and embed it anywhere else. Let me know in
the comments here or on my wiki if you want to add any new sources.

Happy searching!

Loading

Stian
